# Prologue {-}

## References 

- Gathmann's Algebraic Geometry notes[@AndreasGathmann515].

## Notation

- If a property $P$ is said to hold **locally**, this means that for every point $p$ there is a neighborhood $U_p \ni p$ such that $P$ holds on $U_p$.
\[
k[\vector x] \da \kx{n} && \text{The polynomial ring in $n$ indeterminates } \\
k(\vector x) \da k(x_1, \cdots, x_n) && \text{The rational function field } \\
\AA^n_{/k} && \text{Affine $n\dash$space} \\
&& \AA^n_{/k} \da \ts{\tv{k_1, \cdots, k_n} \st k_j \in k} \\
\PP^n_{/k} && \text{Projective $n\dash$space} \\ 
&& \PP^n_{/k} \da \qty{k^n\smz}/x\sim \lambda x \\
&& \ts{f(\vector x) = p(\vector x)/q(\vector x), \st p,q, \in \kx{n}} \\ 
V(J), V_a(J)                   && \text{Variety associated to an ideal } J \normal \kx{n} \\
&& \da \ts{\vector x\in \AA^n \st f(\vector x) = 0,\, \forall f\in J}\\
I(S), I_a(S)                   && \text{Ideal associated to a subset } S \subseteq \AA^n_{k} \\
&& \da \ts{f\in \kx{n} \st f(\vector x) = 0\, \forall \vector x\in X} \\
A(X) && \text{Coordinate ring of a variety} \\
&& \da \kx{n} / I(X)  \\
\OO_X && \text{Structure sheaf } \ts{f:U\to k \st f \in k(\vector x) \text{ locally}} \\
D(f) && \text{Distinguished open set } \\
&& \da V(f)^c = \ts{x\in \AA^n \st f(x) \neq 0} \\
\Delta_X && \text{The diagonal } \ts{(x, x) \st x\in X} \subseteq X\cross X \\
\mathcal{U} \covers X && \text{An open cover} \\
V_p(J) && \text{Projective variety of an ideal} \\
&& \da \ts{\vector x \in \PP^n_{/k} \st f(\vector x) = 0,\, \forall f\in J} \\
I_p(S) && \text{Projective ideal?} \\ 
&& \da \ts{f\in \kx{n} \st f \text{ is homogeneous and } f(x) = 0\, \forall x\in S} \\
S(X) && \text{Projective coordinate ring} \\
&& \da \kx{n}/I_p(X) \\
f^h && \text{Homogenization} \\
 && \da x_0^{\deg f} f\qty{{x_1 \over x_0}, \cdots, {x_n \over x_0}}\\
f^i && \text{Dehomogenization} \\
&& \da V_p(J^h) \da \ts{\vector x \in \PP^n \st f^h(\vector x) = 0\, \forall f\in X} \\
J^h \text{for } J \normal \kx{n} && \text{Homogenization of an ideal}
&& \da f(1, x_1, \cdots, x_n) \\
\bar X && \text{Projective closure of a subset} \\
.\]

\todo[inline]{Lots of notation to fill in.}

Algebra                                       Geometry
-------                                       --------
Radical ideals $J = \sqrt{J} \normal \kx{n}$  $V(J)$ the zero locus
$I(S)$ the ideal of a set                     $S \subseteq \AA^n$ a subset
$I + J$                                       $V(I) \intersect V(J)$
$\sqrt{I(V) + I(W)}$                          $V\intersect W$
$I \intersect J, IJ$                          $V(I) \union V(J)$
$I(V) \intersect I(W), \sqrt{I(V)I(W)}$       $V \union W$
$I(V) : I(W)$                                 $\bar{V\sm W}$
Prime ideals $\mathfrak{p}\in \spec(\kx{n})$  Irreducible subsets


## Summary of Important Concepts

- What is an affine variety?
- What is the coordinate ring of an affine variety?
- What are the constructions $V(\wait)$ and $I(\wait)$?
- What is the Nullstellensatz?
- What are the definitions and some examples of:
  - The Zariski topology?
  - Irreducibility?
  - Connectedness?
  - Dimension?
- What is the definition of a presheaf?
  - What are some examples and counterexamples?
- What is the definition of sheaf?
  - What are some examples?
  - What are some presheaves that are not sheaves?
- What is the definition of $\OO_X$, the sheaf of regular functions?
  - How does one compute $\OO_X$ for $X = D(f)$ a distinguished open?
- What is a morphism between two affine varieties?
- What is the definition of separatedness?
  - What are some examples of spaces that are and are not separated?
- What is a projective space?
- What is a projective variety?
- What is the projective coordinate ring?
- How does one take the closure of an affine variety $X$ in projective space?
- What is completeness?
  - What are some examples and counterexamples of complete spaces?



\newpage

## Useful Examples

### Varieties

- $V(xy-1) \subseteq \AA^2$ a hyperbola
- $V(x)$ a coordinate axis
- $V(x-p)$ a point.

### Presheaves / Sheaves

- $C^\infty(\wait, \RR)$, a sheaf of smooth functions
- $C^0(\wait, \RR)$, a sheaf of continuous functions
- $\OO_X(\wait)$, the sheaf of regular functions on $X$
- $\underline{\RR}(\wait)$, the constant sheaf associated to $\RR$ (locally constant real-valued functions)
- $\Hol(\wait, \CC)$, a sheaf of holomorphic functions
- $K_p$ the skyscraper sheaf:
\[  
K_p(U) \da 
\begin{cases}
k & p\in U \\
0 & \text{else}.
\end{cases}
\]


## Useful Algebra Facts

:::{.fact}
\envlist

- $\mathfrak{p}\normal R$ is prime $\iff R/\mathfrak{p}$ is a domain.
- $\mathfrak{p}\normal R$ is maximal $\iff R/\mathfrak{p}$ is a field.
- Maximal ideals are prime.
- Prime ideals are radical.
- If $R$ is a PID and $\gens{f} \normal R$ is generated by an irreducible element $f$, then $\gens{f}$ is maximal
:::

:::{.proposition title="Finitely generated polynomial rings are Noetherian"}
A polynomial ring $\kx{n}$ on finitely many generators is Noetherian.
In particular, every ideal $I\normal \kx{n}$ has a finite set of generators and can be written as $I = \gens{f_1, \cdots, f_m}$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
A field $k$ is both Artinian and Noetherian, since it has only two ideals and thus any chain of ideals necessarily terminates.
By Hilbert's basis theorem (\cref{thm:hilbert_basis}), $\kx{n}$ is thus Noetherian. 
:::

:::{.proposition title="Properties and Definitions of Ideal Operations"}
\[  
I+J   &\da \ts{f+g \st f\in I,\, g\in J} \\
IJ    &\da \ts{\sum_{i=1}^N f_i g_i \st f_i\in I,\, g_i\in J, N\in \NN} \\
I+J   = \gens{1} 
      &\implies I\intersect J = IJ && \text{(coprime or comaximal)}
\gens{a} + \gens{b} = \gens{a, b}
.\]
:::


:::{.theorem title="Noether Normalization" ref="thm:noether_normalization"}
Any finitely-generated field extension $k_1 \injects k_2$ is a finite extension of a purely transcendental extension, i.e. there exist $t_1, \cdots, t_\ell$ such that $k_2$ is finite over $k_1(t_1, \cdots, t_\ell)$.
:::


:::{.theorem title="Hilbert's Basis Theorem" ref="thm:hilbert_basis"}
If $R$ is a Noetherian ring, then $R[x]$ is again Noetherian.
:::

## The Algebra-Geometry Dictionary

Let $k=\bar k$, we're setting up correspondences
\[  
\text{Ring Theory} 
\quad&\quad 
\text{Geometry/Topology of Affine Varieties}
\\
\text{Polynomial functions} 
\quad&\quad 
\text{Affine space} 
\\
k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]
\quad&\quad 
\AA^n/k \da \ts{\thevector{a_1, \cdots, a_n} \in k^n } 
\\
\text{Maximal ideals } \gens{x_1 - a_1, \cdots, x_n - a_n} 
\quad&\quad 
\text{Points } \thevector{a_1, \cdots, a_n} \in \AA^n/k
\\
\text{Radical ideals } I\normal k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]
\quad&\quad 
\text{Affine varieties } X\subset  \AA^n/k, \text{ vanishing locii of polynomials} 
\\
I &\mapsto V(I) \da \ts{a\st f(a) = 0 \forall f\in I} \\
I(X) \da \ts{f \st \restrictionof{f}{X} = 0} &\mapsfrom X 
\\
\text{Radical ideals containing $I(X)$, i.e. ideals in $A(X)$} 
\quad&\quad 
\text{closed subsets of $X$, i.e. affine subvarieties}
\\
A(X) \text{ is a domain}
\quad&\quad 
\text{$X$ irreducible}
\\
\text{$A(X)$ is not a direct sum}
\quad&\quad 
\text{$X$ connected} 
\\
\text{Prime ideals in }A(X)
\quad&\quad 
\text{Irreducible closed subsets of }X
\\
\text{Krull dimension $n$ (longest chain of prime ideals)}
\quad&\quad 
\dim X = n,\, \text{(longest chain of irreducible closed subsets)}
.\]


