# Tuesday, September 29

Recall the definition of a presheaf: a sheaf of rings on a space is a contravariant functor from its category of open sets to ring, such that

1. $F(\emptyset) = 0$
2. The restriction from $U$ to itself is the identity,
3. Restrictions compose.

Examples:

- Smooth functions on $\RR^n$
- Holomorphic functions on $\CC$

Recall the definition of sheaf: a presheaf satisfying *unique* gluing: given $f_i \in \mathcal{F}(U_i)$, such that $\restrictionof{f_i}{U_i \intersect U_j} = \restrictionof{f_j}{U_i\intersect U_j}$ implies that there exists a unique $f\in \mathcal{F}(\union U_i)$ such that $\restrictionof{f}{U_i} = f_i$.

Question:
Are the constant functions on $\RR$ a presheaf and/or a sheaf?

Answer:
This is a presheaf but not a sheaf.
Set $\mathcal{F}(U) = \ts{f: U\to \RR \st f(x) = c} \cong \RR$ with $\mathcal{F}(\emptyset) = 0$.
Can check that restrictions of constant functions are constant, the composition of restrictions is the overall restriction, and restriction from $U$ to itself gives the function back.

Given constant functions $f_i \in \mathcal{F}(U_i)$, does there exist a unique constant function $\mathcal{F}(\union U_i)$ restricting to them?
No: take $f_1 = 1$ on $(0, 1)$ and $f_2 = 2$ on $(2, 3)$.
Can check that they both restrict to the zero function on the intersection, since these sets are disjoint.

How can we make this into a sheaf?
One way: weaken the topology.
Another way: define another presheaf $\mathcal{G}$ on $\RR$ given by *locally* constant function, i.e. $\ts{f: U\to \RR \st \forall p\in U, \exists U_p\ni p,\, \ro{f}{U_p} \text{ is constant}}$.
Reminiscent of definition of regular functions in terms of local properties.

:::{.example}
Let $X = \ts{p, q}$ be a two-point space with the discrete topology, i.e. every subset is open.
Then define a sheaf by
\[  
\emptyset &\mapsto 0 \\
\ts{p} &\mapsto R \\
\ts{q} &\mapsto S \\
\implies \ts{p, q} &\mapsto R\cross S
,\]
where the sheaf condition forces the assignment of the whole space to be the product.
Note that the first 3 assignments are automatically compatible, which means that we need a unique $f\in \mathcal{F}(X)$ restricting to $R$ and $S$.
In other words, $\mathcal{F}(X)$ needs to be unique and have maps to $R, S$, but this is exactly the universal property of the product.
:::

:::{.example}
Consider the presheaf on $X$ given by $\mathcal{F}(X) = R\cross S \cross T$.
Taking $T = \ZZ/2\ZZ$, we can force uniqueness to fail: by projecting to $R, S$, there are two elements in the fiber, namely $(r,s,0)\mapsto r,s$ and $(r,s,1)\mapsto r,s$.
:::

:::{.example}
Let $X = \ts{a, b, c}$ and $\tau = \ts{\emptyset, \ts{a}, \ts{a, b}, \ts{a, c}}$.
Can check that it's closed under finite intersections and arbitrary unions, so this forms a topology.
Now make the assignments
\[  
\ts{a}& \mapsto A \\
\ts{b}& \mapsto B \\
\ts{a, b}& \mapsto C \\
X &\mapsto ?
.\]

We have a situation like this:
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
& \mathcal{F}(X)\ar[ld]\ar[rd] & \\
B\ar[rd] & & C\ar[ld] \\
& A\ar[d] & \\
& \emptyset &
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

Unique gluing says that given $r\in B, s\in C$ such that $\phi_B(r) = \phi_C(s)$, there should exist a unique $t\in \mathcal{F}(X)$ such that $\ro{t}{\ts{a, b}} = r$ and $\ro{t}{\ts{a, c}} = s$.
This recovers exactly the fiber product.
\[  
B \cross_A C \da \ts{}
.\]

:::
