# Thursday, September 10

Recall that the dimension of a ring $R$ is the length of the longest chain of prime ideals.
Similarly, for an affine variety $X$, we defined $\dim X$ to be the length of the longest chain of irreducible closed subsets.

These notions of dimension of the same when taking $R = A(X)$, i.e. $\dim \AA^n/k = n$.

:::{.proposition title="Dimensions"}
Let $k = \bar k$.

a. The dimension of $k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ is $n$.
b. All maximal chains of prime ideals have length $n$.
:::

:::{.proof}
The case for $n=0$ is trivial, just take $P_0 = \gens{0}$.
For $n=1$, easy to see since the only prime ideals in $k[x]$ are $\gens{0}$ and $\gens{x-a}$, since any polynomial factors into linear factors.
\

Let $P_0 \subsetneq \cdots \subsetneq P_m$ be a maximal chain of prime ideals in $\kx{n}$; we then want to show that $m=n$.
Assume $P_0 = \gens{0}$, since we can always extend our chain to make this true (using maximality).
Then $P_1$ is a minimal prime and $P_m$ is a maximal ideal (and maximals are prime).

:::{.claim}
$P_1$ is principle, i.e. $P_1 = \gens{f}$ for some irreducible $f$.
:::

:::{.proof}
:::{.claim}
$\kx{n}$ is a unique factorization domain.
This follows since $k$ is a UFD since it's a field, and $R$ a UFD $\implies R[x]$ is a UFD for any $R$.

> See Gauss' lemma.

:::

:::{.claim}
In a UFD, minimal primes are principal.
Let $r \in P$, and write $r = u \prod p_i^{n_i}$ with $p_i$ irreducible and $u$ a unit.
So some $p_i\in P$, and $p_i$ irreducible implies $\gens{p_i}$ is prime.
Since $0 \subsetneq \gens{p_i} \subset P$, but $P$ was prime and assumed minimal, so $\gens{p_i} = P$.
:::

The idea is to now transfer the chain $P_0 \subsetneq \cdots \subsetneq P_m$ to a maximal chain in $k[x_1, \cdots, x_{n-1}]$.
The first step is to make a linear change of coordinates so that $f$ is monic in the variable $x_n$.

:::{.example}
Take $f=x_1x_2 + x_3^2 x_4$ and map $x_3 \mapsto x_3 + x_4$.
:::

So write
\[  
f(x_1, \cdots, x_n) = x_n^d + f_1(x_1, \cdots, x_{n-1}) x_n^{d-1} + \cdots + f_d(x_1, \cdots, x_{n-1})
.\]

We can then descend to $\kx{n}$ to $\kx{n}/\gens{f}$:
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
P_0 \ar[r] & P_1 \ar[r]\ar[d] & \cdots \ar[r] & P_m \\
 & P_1/P_1 \ar[r]\ar[d] & \cdots \ar[r]\ar[d] & P_m/P_1 \\
 & P_1/P_1 \intersect \kx{n-1} \ar[r] & \cdots \ar[r]\intersect \kx{n-1} & P_m/P_1
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

The first set of downward arrows denote taking the quotient, and the upward is taking inverse images, and this preserves strict inequalities.

:::


:::


