# Tuesday, October 06

Note: the sheaf of locally constant functions valued in a set $S$ is written $\underline{\mathbf S}$.

## Gathmann Chapter 4

:::{.definition title="Ringed Spaces"}
A **ringed space** is a topological space $X$ together with a sheaf $\OO_X$ of rings.
:::

:::{.example}
\hfill

1. $X$ an affine variety and $\OO_X$ its ring of regular functions.

2. $X$ a manifold over $\RR^n$ with $\OO_X$ a ring of smooth or continuous functions on $X$.

3. $X = \ts{p, q}$ with the discrete topology and $\OO_X$ given by $p\mapsto R, q\mapsto S$.

4. Let $U\subset X$ an open subset of $X$ an affine variety.
  Then declare $\OO_U$ to be $\ro{OO_X}{U}$.
:::

Recall that the restriction of a sheaf $\mathcal{F}$ to an open subset $U\subset X$ is defined by $\ro{\mathcal{F}}{U}(V) = \mathcal{F}(V)$.

:::{.example}
Let $X$ be a topological space and $p\in X$ a point.
The *skyscraper sheaf at $p$* is defined by
\[  
K_p(U) \da 
\begin{cases}
K & p\in U \\
0 & p\not\in U
\end{cases}
.\]
:::

Convention: we'll always assume that $\OO_X$ is a sheaf of functions, so $\OO_X(U)$ is a subring of all $K\dash$valued functions on $U$.
Moreover, $\res_{UV}$ is restriction of $K\dash$valued functions.

:::{.definition title="Morphisms"}
A *morphism of ringed spaces* 
\[  
(X, \OO_X) \mapsvia{f}  (Y, \OO_Y)
\]
 is a continuous map $X\to Y$ such that for all opens $U \subset Y$ and any $\phi \in \OO_Y(U)$, the pullback satisfies $f^* \phi \in \OO_X(f\inv(U))$, i.e. the pullback of a regular function is regular.
:::

Note: need convention that $\OO_X$ is a sheaf of $K\dash$valued functions in order to make sense of pullbacks. 
In general, for schemes, need some analog of $f^*: \OO_X(V) \to \OO_X(U)$.

:::{.example}
If $(X, \OO_X)$ is a ringed space associated to an affine variety, ?
:::


:::{.example}
Let $X = \AA^1/K$ and $U = D(f)$ for $f(x) =x$, then $D(f) = \AA^1\smz$.
Then $U\injects X$ is continuous.
Given an open set $D(f) \subset \AA^1$, we have
\[  
\OO_{\AA^1}(D(f)) \da \ts{g/f^n \st g\in K[x]}
.\]
We want to show that $\iota: (U, \OO_U) \injects (X, \OO_X)$ is a morphism of ringed spaces where $\OO_U(V) = \OO_X(V)$.
Does $\iota^*$ pull back regular functions to regular functions?
Yes, since $\iota^{-1} (D(f)) = D(xf)$ and $g/f^n \in \OO_U(\iota^{-1}(D(f)))$.
:::

:::{.example}
A non-example: take
\[  
h: \AA^1 &\to \AA^1 \\
x & \mapsto 
\begin{cases}
x & x \neq \pm 1 \\
-x & x= \pm 1
\end{cases}
.\]
This is continuous because the zariski topology on $\AA^1$ is the cofinite topology (since the closed sets are finite), so any injective map is continuous since inverse images of cofinite sets are again cofinite.

Question:
Does $h$ define a morphism of ringed spaces?
I.e., is the pullback of a regular function on an open still regular?
Take $U = \AA^1$ and the regular function $x\in \OO_{\AA^1}(\AA^1)$.
Then $h^*x = x\circ h$, so
\[  
(x\circ h)(p) =
\begin{cases}
p & p\neq \pm 1 \\
-p & p= \pm 1 
\end{cases}
\not \in K[x]
\]
since this is clearly not a polynomial: if two polynomials agree on an infinite set of points, they are equal.
:::

:::{.example}
Consider $\iota: (\RR^2, C^\infty) \injects (\RR^3, C^\infty)$ is the inclusion of a coordinate hyperplane.
To say that this is a morphism of ringed spaces, we need that for all $U\subset \RR^3$ open and $f:U\to \RR$ a smooth function, we want $i^* f\in C^\infty (\iota^{-1}(U))$.
But this is the same as $f\circ \iota \in C^\infty(\RR^2\intersect U)$, which is true.
:::


:::{.proposition title="Properties of Morphisms of Ringed Spaces"}

1. They can be composed.
:::


