# Tuesday, October 13

Last time: proved that if $X, Y$ are affine varieties then there is a bijection
\[  
\correspond{\text{Morphisms} \\ f:X\to Y}
&\iff
\correspond{\text{$k\dash$algebra morphisms}\\ A(Y) \to A(X)}
\\
f & \mapsto f^*: \OO_Y(Y) \to \OO_X(X)
.\]

:::{.remark}
A morphism $f:X\to Y$ is by definition a morphism of ringed spaces where $\OO_X, \OO_Y$ are the sheaves of regular functions.
:::

:::{.remark}
This shows $X\cong Y$ as ringed spaces iff $A(X) \cong A(Y)$ as $k\dash$algebras.
:::

:::{.example}
Take
\[  
f: \AA^1 &\to V(y^2 - x^3) \subset \AA^2\\
t &\mapsto (t^2, t^3)
.\]
This is a morphism by proposition 4.7.

We then get a map on algebras
\[  
f^*: A(V(y^2 - x^3)) = k[x, y] / \gens{y^2 - x^3} &\to k[t] \\
x & \mapsto t^2 \\
y & \mapsto t^3
,\]
but even though $f$ is a bijective morphism, it's not an isomorphism of ringed spaces.
This can be seen from the fact that the image doesn't contain $t$.
:::


> Review of introductory category theory.

We'll define a category $\mathrm{AffVar}_k$ whose objects are affine varieties over $k$ and morphisms in $\hom(X, Y)$ will be morphisms of ringed spaces.
There is a contravariant functor $A$ into reduced finitely generated $k\dash$algebras which sends $X$ to $A(X)$ and sends morphisms $f:X\to Y$ to their pullbacks $f^*:A(Y) \to A(X)$, where "reduced" denotes the fact that there are no nilpotents.

> Review of the universal property of the product.

:::{.remark}
If we have $X,Y$ affine varieties, we take $X\cross Y$ to be the categorical product instead of the underlying product of topological spaces.
We have $A(X\cross Y) \cong A(X) \tensor_k A(Y) \cong k[x_1, \cdots, x_n, y_1, \cdots, y_m] / I(X) \tensor 1 + 1 \tensor I(Y)$.
This recovers the product, since if we have

\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
Z \ar[dr, dotted, "\exists"]\ar[rrd, bend left, "f"]\ar[ldd] & & \\
& X\cross Y\ar[r]\ar[d] &X  \\
& Y &  \\
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

:::




