# Thursday, October 08

:::{.proposition title="Gluing"}
Let $f:X\to Y$ be a map of ringed spaces such that there exists an open cover $U_i\covers X$ such that $\ro{f}{U_i}$ is a morphism of ringed spaces. 
Then $f$ itself is a morphism is a morphism of ringed spaces.
:::

Recall that we proved part (a).

:::{.proof title="part b"}
We want to show that $f^*$ sends sections of $\OO_Y$ to sections of $\OO_X$ (e.g. regular functions pullback).
Let $V\subset Y$ be open and $\phi \in \OO_Y(V)$, then
\[  
\ro{f^* \phi}{U_i \intersect f^{-1} (V)}
\qty{ \ro{f^* \phi}{U_i \intersect f^{-1} (V)} }^* \phi \in 
\OO_X(U_i f^{-1} (V))
.\]

Since pullback commutes with restriction, $f^* \phi$ is the unique $k\dash$valued function for which
\[  
\ro{f^* \phi}{U_i \intersect f^{-1} V} =
\ro{f}{U_i\intersect f^{-1} V}^* \phi
.\]
and all of the latter functions agree on overlaps $U_i \intersect U_j$.
This by unique gluing, $f^* \phi \in \OO_X(f^{-1}(V))$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $U\subset X$ be open in an affine variety and let $Y\subset \AA^n$ be another affine variety.
Then the morphisms $U\to Y$ of ringed spaces are the maps of the form $f = \thevector{f_1, \cdots, f_n}: U\to \AA^n$ such that $f(U) \subset Y$ and $f_i \in \OO_X(U)$ for all $i$. 
:::

:::{.proof}
$\implies$:
Assume that $f: U\to Y$ is a morphism.
Then the coordinate functions $Y\mapsvia{y_i} \AA_1$ are regular functions, since they generate $\OO_Y(Y) = k[y_1, \cdots, y_n]/I(Y)$.
Then $f^* y_i$ is a regular function, so define $f_i \da f^* y_i$.
But then $f = \tv{f_1, \cdots, f_n}$.

$\impliedby$:
Conversely suppose $f \da \tv{f_1, \cdots, f_n}: U\to Y \subset \AA^n$ is a map such that $f_i \in \OO_U(U)$.
We want to show that $f$ is a morphism, i.e. that the pullback of every regular function is regular.
We thus need to show

1. $f$ is continuous, and
2. $f^*$ pulls back regular functions.

For 1, suppose $Z$ is closed, then it suffices to show $f^{-1} (Z)$ is closed.
Then $Z = V(g_1, \cdots, g_n)$ for some $g_i \in A(Y)$.
So we can write
\[  
f^{-1} (Z) = \ts{
x\in U \st g_i(f_1(x), \cdots, f_n(x)  ) = 0\, \forall i
}
.\]
The claim is that the functions $g_i$ are regular, i.e. in $\OO_U(U)$, because the $g_i$ are polynomials in regular functions, which form a ring.

This is the common vanishing locus of $m$ regular functions on $U$. 
By lemma 3.4, the vanishing locus of a regular function is closed, so $f^{-1} (Z)$ is closed.
\

For 2, let $\phi \in \OO_Y(W)$ be a regular function on $W\subset Y$ open.
Then
\[  
f^* \phi  = \phi \circ f: f^{-1} (W) &\to K \\
x &\mapsto \phi(f_1(x), \cdots, f_n(x))
.\]
We want to show that this is a regular function.
Since the $f_i$ are regular functions, they are locally fractions, so for all $x\in f^{-1} (W)$ there is a neighborhood of $U_x\ni x$ such that (by intersecting finitely many neighborhoods) all of the $f_i$ are fractions $a_i/b_i$.

Then at a point $p = \tv{f_i(x)}$ in the image, there exists an open neighborhood $W_p$ in $W$ such that $\phi = U/V$.
But then $\phi{\tv{a_i /b_i}} = (U/V)(\tv{a_i/b_i})$, which is evaluation of a fraction of functions on fractions.
:::

:::{.example}
Let $Y = V(xy-1)$ and $U\subset \AA^1$ be $D(x)$, so $U = \AA^1\smz$.
Note that $A(Y) = k[x,y]/\gens{xy-1}$ and $A(\AA^1) = k[t]$, and 
$f_1=t, f_2=t^{-1} \in \OO_U(U)$.
Then 
\[  
\tv{f_1, f_2}: U &\to Y\subset  \AA^2 \\
p &\mapsto \tv{p, {1\over p} }
.\]
Thus the image lies in $Y$.

Conversely, there is a map
\[  
V(xy - 1) &\to U = D(0) \subset  \AA^1 \\
\tv{x, y} &\mapsto x
.\]
This a morphism from $V(xy - 1)$ to $\AA^1$, since the coordinates are regular functions.
Since the image is contained in $U$, the definitions imply that this is in fact a morphism of ringed spaces.
We thus have maps $U\mapsvia{\tv{t, t^{-1} }} V(xy-1)$ and $V(xy-1) \mapsvia{x} U$ which are mutually inverse, so these are isomorphic as ringed spaces.
:::

Thus maps of affine varieties (or their open subsets) are given by functions whose coordinates are regular.


:::{.corollary title="?"}
Let $X, Y$ be affine varieties, then there is a correspondence
\[  
\correspond{\text{Morphisms } X\to Y }
&\iff
\correspond{k\dash\text{algebra morphisms } A(Y) \to A(X)} \\
X\to Y &\mapsto A(Y) \to A(X) \\
f &\mapsto f^* \OO_Y(Y) = \OO_X(X)
.\]

> Thus there is an equivalence of categories between reduced $k\dash$algebras and ???.
:::

:::{.proof}
We have a map in the forward direction.
Conversely, given a $k\dash$algebra morphism $g:A(Y) \to A(X)$, we need to construct a morphism $f$ such that $f^* =  g$.
Let $Y\subset \AA^n$ with coordinate functions $y_1, \cdots, y_n$.
Then $f_i = g(y_i) \in A(X) = \OO_X(X)$.
Set $f = \tv{f_1, \cdots, f_n}$.
Then by the proposition, $f$ is a morphism to $\AA^n$.

Let $h\in A(\AA^n)$, then 

\[
(f^*h)(x) 
&= h(f(x)) \\
&= h(\tv{f_1(x) , \cdots, f_n(x)}) \\
&= h(g(y_1), \cdots, g(y_n)) \\ 
&= g(h)(x) \qquad\text{since $g$ is an algebra morphism, $h$ is a polynomial}
\]
which follows since $f_i(x) = g(y_i)(x)$, where $g:A(Y) \to A(X)$.
So $f^*(h) = g(h)$ for all $h\in A(\AA^n)$, so the pullback of $f$ is $g$.
We now need to check that it's contained in the image.
Let $h\in I(Y)$, then $f^*(h) = g(h) = 0$ since $h = 0 \in A(Y)$.
So $\im f \subset Y$. 
Since the coordinate $f_i$ are regular, this is a morphism, and we have $f^* = g$ as desired.
:::

:::{.example}
Isomorphisms are not necessarily bijective morphisms.
Let $X = V(y^2 - x^3) \subset \AA^2$.

Then there is a morphism
\[  
\phi: \AA^1 &\to X \\
t &\mapsto \tv{t^2, t^3}
,\]
since the coordinates $t^2, t^3$ are regular functions.
Then $\phi$ is a bijection, since we can define a piecewise inverse
\[  
\phi^{-1}: X &\to \AA^1 \\
\tv{x, y} &\mapsto 
\begin{cases}
y/x & x\neq 0 \\
0 & \text{else}
\end{cases}
.\]
However, $\phi ^{-1}$ is not a morphism. 
For instance, pulling back the function $t$ yields $\qty{\phi ^{-1} }^* t \not \in A(X)$, since it is equal to the map $\tv{x, y} \mapsto y/x$ for $x\neq 0$ and $0$ if $x=y=0$, which is not a regular function.

Since $\phi$ is a morphism, we can consider the corresponding map of $k\dash$algebras
\[  
\phi^*: A(X) &\to A(\AA^1) \\
k[x, y]/\gens{y^2 - x^3} &\mapsto k[t] \\
x & \mapsto t^2 \\
y &\mapsto t^3
.\]


:::

