# Tuesday, September 15

## Setup

- $(M, \omega)$ a symplectic manifold, $H \in ?$ a Hamiltonian, $X_H$ its ?

- $\int_{S^2} u^* \omega =\sigma_1$ where $u\in C^\infty(S^2, W)$.

- $\inner{c_1(TW), \pi_2(TW)} = 0$?

- $C_k(H) \da \ZZ/2\ZZ[S]$ where $S$ is the set of periodic orbits of $X_H$ of Maslov index $k$.

- $x, y$ critical points of $\mathcal{A}_H$ with $\mathcal{M}(x, y)$ the moduli space of contractible solutions of finite energy connecting $x,y$.


## Review Last Time

- $\RR\actson \mathcal{M}_{x, y}$, so we quotient to define $\mathcal{L}(x, y) =\da \mathcal{M}_{x, y} / \RR$ with the quotient topology.

- Topology defined by when sequences converge: 
\[  
\tilde u_n \converges{n\to\infty}\to \tilde u \iff \exists \ts{s_n} \subseteq \RR \text{ such that } u_{n}(s_n + s, \wait) \converges{n\to\infty}\to u(s, \cdot)
.\]

:::{.proposition title="?"}
$\mathcal{L}(x, y)$ is Hausdorff.
::

- Want to show $\mathcal{L}(x, y)$ is a compact 0-dimensional manifold.

- Have a differential

\[  
\begin{array}{l}
\partial: C_{k}(H) &\longrightarrow C_{k-1}(H) \\
\partial(x) &= \sum_{\operatorname{Ind}(y)=k-1} n(x, y) y
\end{array}
.\]
with $n(x ,y)$ the number (mod 2) of trajectories of $\grad \mathcal{A}_H$ connecting $x, y$, i.e solutions to the Floer equation.

- Want to prove that the following is a 1-dimensional manifold:
\[  
M \da \overline{\mathcal{L}}(x, z)=\mathcal{L}(x, z) \cup_{\mu(y)=\mu(x)+1} \mathcal{L}(x, y) \times \mathcal{L}(y, z)
.\]
and show that $M$ is compact with $\bd M$ equal to the last union.


- Last time: closure of space of trajectories connecting $x, y$ contains "broken" trajectories.

- Last time: toward proving that $M$ is compact

## Upcoming

- Wanted to compactify $\mathcal{L}(x, y)$, needed to go to space of broken trajectories.

- Main theorem of chapter 9: 9.2.1.

:::{.theorem title="9.2.1"}
Let $(H, J)$ be a regular pair with $H$ nondegenerate.

Let $x, z$ be two periodic trajectories of $H$ such that $\mu(x) = \mu(z) + 2$.

Then $\bar{\mathcal{L}}(x, y)$ is a compact 1-manifold with boundary satisfying
\[  
\partial \overline{\mathcal{L}}(x, y)=\bigcup_{\mu(x)<\mu(y)<\mu(z)} \mathcal{L}(x, y) \times \mathcal{L}(y, z)
.\]

As a corollary, $\bd^2 = 0$.
:::

- Know $\bar{\mathcal{L}}(x, y)$ is compact and $\mathcal{L}(x ,y)$ is a 1-manifold
- Now suffices to study in a neighborhood of boundary points ("gluing theorem")




