# Lecture 12 (Chapter 3: Curves Over a Finite Field)

We consider $k= \FF_q$ a finite field, which by definition is a one variable global function field.
Idea: we've defined some affine dedekind domains (the holomorphy rings) had a finite nonempty set of places of the function field.
These are analogous to the ring of integers of a number field, or more generally $S\dash$integer rings.
Recall some basic results from NT1: the finiteness of the class group, and the finite generation of the unit group.
Here we have a class groups of affine Dedekind domain, and by Rosen's theorem, there are infinitely many as you vary over nonempty subsets of places of the function field, and they're all closely connected to a geometric class group: the degree zero divisor class group.
Thus by this analogy, when the field is finite, we'd expect that $\Div^0$ is finite as well, which is the main result we'll prove today.

## Base Extension

Let $K_{/\FF_q}$ be a one variable function field with constant field $\FF_q$, so that the only elements of $K$ that are algebraic over $\FF_q$ are already in $\FF_q$.
Since $\FF_q$ is a perfect field ($x\mapsto x^p$ is a surjection), every such function field is regular.

Let $\bar{\FF}_q$ be an algebraic closure, then for all $r\in \ZZ^+$ there exists a unique degree $r$ extension, which we'll denote $\FF_{q^r}$.
The extension $\FF_{q^r}/\FF_q$ is a cyclic galois extension (i.e. it's galois group is cyclic) with a canonical generator: the Frobenius map.

The galois theory of the constant field comes in when trying to study constant extensions of the function field.
There is a general theory of constant extensions, but in our case, every such extension will be cyclic or procyclic, so we don't need the entire theory.

For any positive integer $r$, define the extension $K_r \da K \FF_{q^r}$ given by extending scalars, which is a regular function field over $\fqr$.
There are two ways to obtain this: either take an algebraic closure of $K$ and take the compositum, or take $K\tensor_{\fq}\fqr$, which we proved was again a field.
This $K_r$ is what we get by extending constants, and the way regular function fields work is that if you make an arbitrary extension of the ground field, then you retain a regular function field over this new extension.
On the other hand, note that $K_R/K$ is a degree $r$ arithmetic extension of function field, whose galois group is also generated by Frobenius.
If we take any regular function field over $k$ and then take a finite galois extension $l/k$, then extending scalars in this way would give an extension of the upstairs fields which is galois and has the same galois group as the constant extension.
This is *arithmetic* because the only thing that changes going from $K$ to $K_r$ is the field of constants.

In the analogy of function fields as the meromorphic functions on a Riemann surface, this type of extension has no analog: since $\CC$ is algebraically closed, there are no constant extensions.
So arithmetic extensions are just extending scalars, and *geometric* extensions  don't change the constant field at all and instead have the property that if you extended scalars to the algebraic closure, you'd have an extension of the same degree.
Note that the étale fundamental group also has a similar decomposition into an arithmetic part and a geometric part (see Daniel Litt's course).

:::{.question}
Given a place in $K$, how does it split (or not) in $K_r$?
:::

:::{.remark}
We can ask this question in whenever we have an extension of function fields.
This reduces to the usual ATI type of question: for $v\in \Sigma(K/\fq)$, choose an affine Dedekind domain $R$ such that $v\in \Sigma(K/R)$, i.e. the place is regular.
Let $S$ be the integral closure of $K$ in $K_r$; this place corresponds to a maximal ideal $\mathfrak{p}$, we then want to factor its pushforward $\mathfrak{p}_v S$.
So this question is a special case of how a prime ideal factors in an extension of Dedekind domains.
:::

We'll temporarily blackbox the following lemma:

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Suppose $v$ is the downstairs place, $r$ is the degree of the extension, and $d\da \deg(v)$.
Then 

- $K_r/K$ is galois and we have $efg = r$.[^residual_degree_expl]

- This extension will be unramified: we in fact have $e=1$, so $g = \gcd(d, r)$ and $f = r/\gcd(d, r)$, and

- Each place $w\in \Sigma(K_r/\fqr)$ lying over $v$ has degree $d/\gcd(d, r)$.

[^residual_degree_expl]: $e$ is the prime ramification index, $f$ is the prime residual degree, and $g$ is the number of distinct primes. 
This result essentially comes from ANTI, replacing $\sum e_i f_i = r$.

:::

:::{.remark}
Note that having an extension of Dedekind domains coming from a galois extension of fields simplifies things: this makes the inertial degree and ramification indices coincide.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
\envlist
- The extension is inert $\iff$ $\gcd(d, r) = 1$

  - I.e. $d, r$ are coprime and $g=e=1, f=r$.

- The extension splits completely $\iff$ $r \divides d$.

  - If $r=d$, i.e. we take a degree $d$ place and extend scalars to $K_d$, it splits completely into $d$ degree 1 places.

- All $w\divides v$ have degree 1 $\iff$ $d\divides r$.

:::

:::{.remark}
Suppose we have $w$ over $v$ with $w\in \Sigma(\fqr)$ and $v\in \Sigma(K/\fq)$.
If $v$ has degree $d$, this means that the residue field satisfies $k(v) \cong \FF_{q^{d}}$, since we have unique extensions in each degree.
If $f$ is the $f$ from ANTI, it is also the degree of the residual extension, so we know $[k(w): k(v)] = f$ and thus $k(w) \cong  \FF_q^{f d}$.

On the other hand, $k(w)$ is an extension of $\fqr$ of degree $\deg(w)$, so $k(w) \cong \FF_{ \qty{q^r}^{\deg(w)} } = \FF_{q^{r\deg(w)}}$.
Thus $r=fg$ and
\[  
q^{f\deg(v)} = q^{r\deg(w)} \implies \deg(w) = \qty{f\over r}\deg(v) = { \deg(v) \over g}
.\]

The residue field, if it changes at all, can only increase in size, since any extension of Dedekind domains induces an extension of residue fields.
So the size of the residue field of $w$ is at least as big as the size of the residue field of $v$.
But the degree of $w$ is measured relative to the extended field $\fqr$, since it's the degree of the residue field as an extension of $\fqr$.
So consider $\deg(w) = \deg(v)/g$, we see that even as the residue field is increasing by a factor of $f$, the degree of the point is decreasing by a factor of $g$.

**Upshot**:
The residue field grows, but its degree can only shrink.
Thus making an extension forces the degrees of the upstairs places to *decrease*.
:::


