# Sunday, August 30

Last of preliminaries.
Upcoming: one-variable function fields and their valuation rings.


## Polynomials Defining Regular Function Fields
Where's the curve: $f(x, y) = 0$.

:::{.exercise}
Let $R_1, R_2$ be $k\dash$algebras that are also domains with fraction fields $K_i$.
Show $R_1 \tensor_k R_2$ is a domain $\iff$ $K_1 \tensor_k K_2$ is a domain.

> Denominator-clearing argument.
:::

:::{.definition title="Geometrically Irreducible"}
A polynomial of positive degree $f\in k[t_1, \cdots, t_n]$ is *geometrically irreducible* if $f\in \bar k[t_1, \cdots, t_n]$ is irreducible as a polynomial.
:::

If $n=1$ then $f$ is geometrically irreducible $\iff$ it's linear, i.e. of degree 1.

Let $f$ be irreducible, then since polynomial rings are UFDs then $\gens{f}$ is a prime ideal (irreducibles generate principal ideals) and $k[t_1, \cdots, t_n]/\gens{f}$ is a domain.
Let $K_f$ be the fraction field.

:::{.exercise}
Easy:

a. Above for $1\leq i \leq n$ let $x_i$ be the image of $t_i$ in $K_f$.
  Show that $K_f = k(x_1, \cdots, x_n)$.

b. Show that if $K/k$ is generated by $x_1, \cdots, x_n$, then it is the fraction field of $k[t_1, \cdots, t_n] /\mfp$ for some prime ideal $\mfp$ (equivalently, a height 1 ideal).
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
Suppose that $f$ is geometrically irreducible.

a. The function field $K/k$ is regular.

b. For all $\ell/k$, $f\in \ell[t_1, \cdots, t_n]$ is irreducible.

  > In this case we say $f$ is *absolutely irreducible* as a synonym for geometrically irreducible.
:::


:::{.proof}
By definition of geometric irreducibility, $\bar k[t_1, \cdots, t_n]/\gens{f} = k[t_1, \cdots, t_n]/\gens{f} \tensor_k \bar k$ is a domain.
The exercise shows that $K_f \tensor_k k$ is a domain, so $K_f$ is regular.

It follows that for all $\ell/k$, $K_f \tensor_k \ell$ is a domain, so $\ell[t_1, \cdots, t_n]/\gens{f}$ is a domain.

:::

Moral: geometrically irreducible polynomials are good sources of regular function fields.

:::{.exercise}
Let $k$ be a field, $d\in \ZZ^+$ such that $4\notdivides d$ and $p(x) \in k[x]$ be positive degree.
Factor $p(x) = \prod_{i=1}^r (x-a_i)^{\ell_i}$ in $\bar k[x]$.

a. Suppose that for some $i$, $d\notdivides \ell_i$. 
  Show that $f(x, y) \da y^d - p(x) \in k[x, y]$ is geometrically irreducible.
  Conclude that $K_f \da ff\qty{k[x, y] / \gens{y^d - p(x)}}$ is a regular one-variable function field over $k$, and thus elliptic curves yield regular function fields.

  > Referred to as *hyperelliptic* or *superelliptic* function fields.
  > Hint: use FT 9.21 or Lang's Algebra.

b. What happens when $4\divides d$?
:::


:::{.exercise title="Nice, Recommended"}

:::





