# Monday, April 26

:::{.remark}
Last time: we saw $\Cl(V) \cong \Cl_0(V \oplus \RR)$, and as a corollary, 
\[
\Cl_0(\RR^4) \cong \Cl(\RR^3) = \HH \oplus \HH
.\]
Question from class: what's the motivation for studying the Clifford algebra in the first place?
Rough answer, they give a nice way of studying orthogonal transformations in $\RR^n$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Pin"}
The group $\Pin(V)$ is the subgroup of units of $\Cl(V)$, which is generated by \( \ts{ v\in V \st \norm{v} = 1 } \), so
\[
\Spin(V) \da \Pin(V) \intersect \Cl_0(V)
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
There is a map
\[
V\injects \Cl(V) = \RR \gens{ \elts{e_i}{k}\st i_1 \leq \cdots \leq i_k }  
,\]
so we can identify $V$ with $V^{\tensor 1}$ in the degree 1 piece of $\Cl(V)$.
In fact, $V^{\tensor 1} \subseteq \Cl_1(V)$, the odd part, since writing $\Cl(V) = \bigoplus_{i\geq 0} V^{\tensor i}/\cdots$, anything falling in an odd degree is in the odd part.
If $\norm{v} = 1$, we have $v^2 =-1$ and thus $v(-v) = 1$, so $v\in \Cl(V)\units$.
:::

:::{.question}
If $v\in V$ with $\norm{v} = 1$, is it true that $v\in \Spin(V)$?
:::

:::{.answer}
No, since $V \subseteq \Cl(V)$ is in fact in $\Cl_1(V)$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
What do elements of $\Spin(\RR^2)$ look like?
We can write
\[
\Cl(\RR^2) = \RR \oplus \RR e_1 \oplus \RR e_2 \oplus \RR e_1 e_2
,\]
and note that $e_1, e_2 \in \Pin(V)$ if we take the $e_i$ to be orthonormal.
But similarly, $\cos(\theta) e_1 + \sin(\theta) e_2 \in \Pin(V)$ for any $\theta \in \RR/2\pi \ZZ$.
Also note that $e_1e_1 \in \Pin(V) \intersect \Cl_0(V)$, and $e_1 e_1 = -1 \in \Spin(V)$.
What are some other elements?
We can compute
\[
e_1 \qty{ \cos(\theta) e_1 + \sin(\theta) e_2) = -\cos(\theta) + \sin(\theta)e_1 e_2}
,\]
and so 
\[
\Spin(\RR^2) = \ts{ -\cos(\theta) + \sin(\theta)e_2 e_2 \st \theta \in \RR/2\pi \ZZ } 
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Notation: we'll write $\Spin(n) \da \Spin(\RR^n)$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
$\Spin(3) \cong \SU(2)$ as groups.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
We saw that $\Cl_0(\RR^3) \cong \Cl(\RR^2) \cong \HH$, and so $\Spin(3) \subseteq \HH \cong \Cl_0(\RR^3)$ is the subset of the group of units.
We have
\[
\Cl_0(\RR^3) = \RR \oplus \RR e_1 e_2 \oplus \RR e_1 e_3 \oplus \RR e_2 e_1 \da \RR 1 \oplus \RR i \oplus \RR j \oplus \RR k
,\]
and $\Spin(3)$ is generated by all products $vw$ where $v, w\in \RR^3$ with $\norm{v} = \norm{w} = 1$.
So vary over all $w$ in the unit circle in $\RR e_1 \oplus \RR x$ for $x\in \RR^3$, then the product $vw$ yields a 1-parameter subgroup of $\HH\units$.
First consider
\[
e_1 \qty{ \RR e_1 \oplus \RR x} = \RR \gens{ -1 }  \oplus \RR \gens{ e_1 x } = \RR \oplus \RR e_1 x \subset \HH 
.\]
Then $\Spin(3)$ contains any 1-parameter subgroup of $\HH\units$, which means $S^1(\HH) \subseteq \Spin(3)$ (where $S^1(\HH)$ are the unit norm elements).
By changing basis, we may assume $v= e_1$, so this gives an equality.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$\Spin(4) \cong \SU(2)^{\times 2}$.
\
Note that 
\[
\Spin(4) \subseteq \Cl_0(\RR^4) = \Cl(\RR^3) = \HH^{\oplus 2}
.\]
Fix a copy $\RR^3 \subseteq \RR^4$ (similar to how we fixed $\RR^2 \subseteq \RR^3$ above) to get an identification $\Cl_0(\RR^4) \cong \Cl(\RR^3)$.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{42pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-04-26_14-21.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

We then have
\[
\Cl_0(\RR^4) = \Cl(\RR^3) \supseteq \Spin(\RR^3) \cong \SU(2) = S^1(\HH)
.\]
The copy of $\RR^3$ induces inclusions $\Spin(3) \injects \Spin(4)$, coming from $S^1(\HH) \injects \HH \injects \HH^{\oplus 2}$.
One needs to check that 
\[
S^3 = \SU(2) = S^1(\HH^{\oplus 2})
,\]
and that these elements generate $(S^3)^{\times 2} = (\SU(2))^{\times 2}$.

> Note that none of these inclusions are just inclusions into one factor.

:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Complete this computation.
Easiest way: just use a basis and hack!
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
There is a homomorphism $\Spin(\RR^n) \to \SO(\RR^n)$ with kernel $\ZZ/2$.
If $n\geq 3$, then $\Spin(\RR^n) \cong \univcover{\SO(\RR^n)}$ is the universal cover.
:::

:::{.proof title="Sketch"}
Note that $\Spin(V) \subseteq \Cl(V)\units$ acts on $\Cl(V)$ by conjugation:
\[
\Spin(V) &\mapsto \Endo_{\Vect_{/\RR}} \Cl(V) \\
g&\mapsto ( x \mapsto gxg\inv )
.\]
Looking at $\Pin(V)$ is perhaps easier, since we have generators \( \ts{ u \st \norm{u} = 1 } \).
Noting that $u\inv = -u$ by a previous computation, we can write $uxu\inv = -uxu$, and we also have $xu+ux = -2u\cdot x$, and so
\[
-uxu 
&= -u( -ux -2u\cdot x ) \\
&=-x + 2u(x\cdot u)
,\]
so note that if $x\in V \subset \Cl_1(V)$, then the result $-uxu \in V \subset \Cl_1(V)$ as well.

:::{.corollary title="?"}
The conjugation action by $\Pin(V)$ preserves $V = V^{\tensor 1} \subset \Spin(V)$.
Question: what does the following map do geometrically?
\[
V &\to V \\
x &\mapsto -x + 2u(x\cdot u)
.\]
Writing this $x\mapsto -R_u x$, here $R_u$ is reflection in the plane orthogonal to $u$.
So there is a map
\[
\Pin(V) &\to O(V) \\
u &\mapsto -R_u 
,\]
and on $\Spin(V)$, any two reflections preserve orientation, so 
\[
u_1 u_2 \mapsto (-R_{u_1})(-R_{u_2}) = R_{u_1} R_{u_2} \in \SO(V)
,\] 
and this yields a group homomorphism $\Spin(\RR^n) \to \SO(\RR^n)$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Every element of $\SO(V)$ is an even product of reflections, so $\Spin(V) \surjects \SO(V)$.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
As an exercise, check that $\OO(\RR^n)$ can be generated by reflections?

> Note, missed a part here.

:::

:::{.remark}
What is the kernel of this map? 
If for $g\in \Spin(V)$ we have $gxg\inv = x$ for all $x\in V \subset \Cl(V)$, then $g\in Z \Cl(V)$ is in the center.
Moreover, one can check that for $n$ odd, $Z \Cl(V) = \pm\ts{ 1, e_1, \cdots, e_n }$, and for $n$ even $Z\Cl(V) = \pm\ts{ 1 }$.
In either case, 
\[
Z \Cl(V) \intersect \Cl_0(V) = \ts{ \pm 1 } \cong \ZZ/2
,\] 
which finishes the proof.
:::

:::


















