---
title: Notes on Tilings
---

# From Class

Motivation: Gauss' Unicursal Problem.
How many distinct curves $\alpha: I \to \RR^2$ with are there with no triple crossings?

Note that if we compactify the plane to the Riemann sphere (and possibly take the curve to be piecewise linear) then we obtain a *tiling* of the sphere.
We can also take a *dual tiling* by taking the barycenters of each polygon and connecting them by an edge iff their corresponding polygons share an edge.

Definition:
A *translation surface* is the 2-dimensional topological manifold obtained by taking any set of polygons in $\RR^2$ and gluing their edges by translations.

Example:
Any elliptic curve (topologically a torus).

We take equivalence up to cutting, pasting, and rearranging.

Lemma:
Two elliptic curves (of genus 2) are isomorphic iff the translation surfaces differ by a homothety, i.e. a rotation and scaling.

> Note: we will eventually see that the data of a translation surface is equivalently a holomorphic 1-form.

Definition:
A *half-translation surface* is a translation surface where we now additionally allow gluing by rotations of $\pi$ radians.

Example:

\begin{tikzpicture}
	\begin{pgfonlayer}{nodelayer}
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (0) at (-3, 3) {};
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (1) at (3, 3) {};
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (2) at (-3, -3) {};
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (3) at (3, -3) {};
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (4) at (0, 3) {};
		\node[fill=black, shape=circle]  (5) at (0, -3) {};
	\end{pgfonlayer}
	\begin{pgfonlayer}{edgelayer}
		\draw (1.center) to node [auto] {$a$} (3.center);
		\draw (0.center) to node [left] {$a$} (2.center);
		\draw (0.center) to node [above] {$b$} (4.center);
		\draw (4.center) to node [above] {$b$} (1.center);
		\draw (2.center) to node [below] {$c$} (5.center);
		\draw (5.center) to node [below] {$c$} (3.center);
	\end{pgfonlayer}
\end{tikzpicture}

**Lemma:**
Any game of *rectangular billiards* yields a translation surface.
