# Thursday January 16th

Recall:
Start with a translation surface with cone points with angles $2\pi n i$.
This yields a Riemann surface $\Sigma$ and a holomorphic $1\dash$form $\omega$ with zeros of order $n_i -1$.

Given a square fundamental domain, there is an order 4 automorphism given by rotating 90 degrees.
In charts, this is multiplication by $i$ and possibly a translation, which is a holomorphic map $f: \Sigma \selfmap$.
We then have $f^*(dz) = d(f(z)) = idz$, so $dz$ is an eigenvector for $f^*$.

An elliptic curve can be specified by $y^2 = f_4(x)$ for a degree 4 polynomial, so we can obtain it as a double branched cover of $S^2$.
(i.e. glue along the slits joining pairs of roots)

Take $E : y^2 = x^4 - 1$, this is the only elliptic curve with an order 4 automorphism.
In coordinates, this is generated by $(x, y) \mapsto (-ix ,y)$.
So $\omega = c \frac{dx}{y}$, i.e. $dx/y$ up to scaling, and $f^*(dx/y) = i \frac{dx}{y}$.
What is the constant $c$?

Take closed cycles on $E$ given by $\alpha, \beta$ (see diagram), then by FTC $\int_\alpha \omega = z \mid_0^1 = 1$.
Negation is 4 fixed points on the elliptic curve, the 2-torsion points.

We can then compute

\begin{align*}
I = \int_\alpha  \frac{dx}{y} = \int_1^2 \frac{dx}{\sqrt{x^4 - 1}} 
.\end{align*}

and since $2c I = 1$, this uniquely determines $c$.

Note that this can be numerically evaluated, but this is an elliptic integral with (possibly) no elementary antiderivative.


Consider the decagon with sides identified.
We get a complex structure $(\Sigma, \omega)$ with cone angles $4\pi$ and $dz$ has 2 zeros of order 1 (namely the two cone points).

What is the genus?
The degree of the canonical bundle is $g(\Sigma) \deg K_\Sigma = 2g - 2 = \sum_{p\in \Sigma}\ord_p \omega$ and thus $g = 2$.

Fact:
Every genus 2 curve is a double branched cover of $\PP^1$ branched over 6 points.

> Use Riemann-Roch.

Consider automorphisms that preserve the decagon.
Rotation by $\pi/10$ swaps the two cone points, to take rotation by $-2\pi/5$ (inserting the negative to account for pullbacks).
Then $f^* \omega = \zeta_5 \omega$, where again we just write locally $z \mapsvia{f} \zeta_5\inv + c \implies \f^* dz = \zeta_5 dz$.

Consider points of order $5$ on $\PP^1$, we can take $\zeta_5^k$ and $\infty$.
This corresponds to the curves $y^2 = x^5 - 1$, with an automorphism $(x, y) \mapsto (\zeta_5 x, y)$.
This is the only genus 2 curve with an order 5 automorphism.

Fact:
The space of sections of the canonical $H^0(\K_{\mathcal E}) = \CC^g$.

We can write a basis for the space of 1-forms: $\frac{dx}{y}$ and $(1-x) \frac{dx}{y}$.
Alternatively, $\omega = (a+bx) \frac{dx}{y}$ where $a, b \in \CC$.
What are the zeros of $\omega$?
$V(\omega) = V(a + bx)$ where if $b=0$ it's $\infty$.
