# Thursday, June 03

> Jeremey Hanh, MIT: something abelian about commutative ring spectra
> See Tablbot 2017 notes and Richter's survey article "Commutative Ring Spectra".

The 2017 Talbot was on structured ring spectra, i.e. "brave new algebra", where we study $E_n\dash$ring spectra.
Getting the subject off the ground requires many definitions, care of May, EKMM, Lurie, and more.


:::{.remark}
The key objects we'll be considering:

- $\SS$, the initial $E_\infty$ ring spectrum
- Thom $E_\infty$ring spectra: $\MO, \MSO, \MSp, \MStr, \MU$, and the sphere fits into this pattern as framed bordism

We construct *other* $E_\infty$ rings primarily to study these motivating examples.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
A ring spectrum that shows up naturally when ?:
 $\MU$, for which $\pi_* \MU \cong \ZZ[x_1, x_2, \cdots]$ where each $\abs{x_i} = 2i$.
Localing at a prime $p$ splits $\MU_{(p)}$ into  sum of suspensions $\BP$ where $\pi_* \BP = \ZZ_{(p)}[x_1, x_2, \cdots]$ with $\abs{x_i} = 2p^i - 2$.
We can write $\BP = \MU / \gens{x_j \st j\neq p^i - 1}$.
So $\BP$ has simpler homotopy, and $\MU$ splits into a sum of copies of $\BP$, which are easier to work with because the homotopy is more sparsely distributed.
$\BP$ is a bit of a "designer" spectrum, and $\MU$ is more geometric.
:::


:::{.question}
Does this splitting preserve the face that $\MU$ is an $E_\infty$ ring spectrum?
I.e. is $\BP$ an $E_\infty$ ring spectrum?
:::


:::{.answer}
No! See Lawson and Senger, who prove that $\BP$ not an $E_{2p^2 + q}\dash$ring spectrum.
It turns out that understanding the $E_4$ structure is sufficient for many applications.
:::


:::{.theorem title="Basterra, Mandell"}
$\BP$ is an $E_4\dash$algebra retract of $\MU$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Some open questions:

1. Is $\BP$ and $E_5\dash\MU\dash$algebra?
2. The $E_n$ operad acts on $\BP$, so is $\BP$ a $\Disk_2\dash$algebra?
  In particular, can one take factorization homology against unframed surfaces?
  This would correspond to a trivial $S^1\dash$action.
:::


:::{.remark}
Studying other $E_\infty$rings naturally leads to problems in obstruction theory.
We study $\SS$ via chromatic homotopy theory.
The basic strategy:

- Resolve $\SS$ by other $E_\infty$ rings, namely the $K(n)\dash$local sphere $L_{K(n)} \SS$.
  Note that this is a Bousfield localization.
  This is useful precisely because of the chromatic convergence theorem, and one can build a tower whose associated graded are these local spheres.

- Resolve $L_{K(n)} \SS$ for a fixed $n$ by the Hopkins-Miller $\EO\dash$theories, which are $E_\infty$ rings of the form $E_n^{hG}$ for $G$ a finite group acting on the height $n$ Morava $E\dash$theory $E_n$.
  These $\EO$ theories are supposed to be the basic building blocks of the $K(n)\dash$local spheres.
  (Check)

:::


:::{.question title="A big one"}
Can one generally construct the $\EO$ localizations above?
:::


:::{.remark}
Proved for a fixed degree/height? Check.
A recent triumph of obstruction theory is that the building block $\EO$ theories have been built.
This was a prominent topic in 2017 Talbot.
:::


:::{.remark}
How one builds $\EO$ theories:

- Build $E_n$ as a homotopy commutative ring using the Landweber exact functor theorem, which is not too difficult.
- Promote the $E_n$ to $E_\infty$ rings using obstruction theory.
  - See Robinson, Goerss-Hopkins, Lurie, Pstragowki and VanKoughnett.
  These allow one to make $G\dash$actions by $E_\infty$ ring maps.
  - Rough sketch: build an $E_\infty$ ring in $\ho\Sp$ (the homotopy category of spectra), which is already a homotopy commutative ring.
    Then do this in the homotopy 2-category of $\Sp$, then the homotopy 3-category of $\Sp$, and so on.
    This uses that an $\infty\dash$category is a sequence of $n\dash$categories.
:::


:::{.question}
Can one compute $\pi_* \EO$ for $\EO \da E_n^{hG}$ for various $n$ and $G$?
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
The key to the Kervaire invariant one question is computing $\pi_* E_4 ^{hC_8}$, and captures information about diffeomorphism classes of exotic spheres.
:::


:::{.observation}
In practice, these $\EO$ theories (which are all $K(n)\dash$local) seem to be $K(n)\dash$localizations of nice connective ring spectra.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
At the prime $p=2$, $E_1^{hC_2} = \KO\localize{2}$ is the localization of $\KO$ at 2, and turns out to be equal to $L_{K(1)}(k_0)$.
It turns out that $E_2^{hC_{24}} = L_{K(2)} (\tmf)$, and so $\ko$ and $\tmf$ are "connective $E_\infty$ lifts" of $E_1^{hC_2}$ and $E_2^{hC_{24}}$.
:::


:::{.remark}
These lifts are closer to geometry than $\EO$ theories, e.g. there is an $E_\infty$ ring map due to Ando-Hopkins-Rezk
\[
\MString \to \tmf
.\]

> Find comments

See how $\MSpin$ splits as ???, so one might expect that $\MString$ is ???
:::


:::{.remark}
An observation due to Hi-Kriz and Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel: using sparsity, the easiest way to compute $\pi_* \EO$ is to compute $\pi_* \eo$ where $\eo$ is a good connective lift of $\EO$.
Note that $\pi_* \tmf$ is finitely-generated in each degree, and it's useful to work with something "small" in computations, for example if you're trying to rule out differentials in spectral sequences.
A nice way to organize the computations of $\pi_* \EO$ is to understand them via lifts with better finiteness properties.
:::


:::{.question}
Can we make connective $\eo$ theories highly structured with $L_{K(n)} \eo = \EO = E_n^{hG}$ for various and $n$ and $G$?
:::

> See example in comment


:::{.remark}
$\tmf$ is a connective $\EO$ theory, so how is $\tmf\localize{2}$ built?
For full details, see the tmf book or Lurie's "Elliptic Cohomology".
A sketch: $\tmf\localize{2} = \tau_{\geq 0} L_2 \tmf\localize{2}$ where the latter is built out of a finite resolution involving the following three terms:

- $L_{K(2)} \tmf$
- $L_{K(1)} \tmf$
- $L_{\QQ} \tmf$

Note that $L_2$ is the second stage of the chromatic tower.
The basic strategy: take the monochromatic pieces above, which are relatively easy to make and work with, and find a way to glue them together.
:::


:::{.remark}
An idea: one can try to make $\eo$ as a connective cover of some $L_n\dash$local object.
See Lawson, Berhrens-Lawson and $\TAF$ (topological automorphic forms).
This worked very well for $\tmf$, and there is currently partial progress at height 3.
We're not yet able to construct a connective  version of $E_4^{hC_8}$, which was needed in Kervaire Invariant One.

Note that all techniques used here seem to work equally well for building $E_\infty$ as $E_n$ rings for finite $n$.

> See comments

:::

:::{.remark}
An alternate idea that let Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel solve Kervaire Invariant One, and recently developed by Beaudry-Hill-Shi-Zeng, constructs a connective version of $E_4^{hC_8}$.
However, with this construction, it's less clear how much structure there is on the object.
They use the following procedure:

- Put a $C_8$ action on $\MU^{\tensor 4}$ by viewing this as a norm $\NN_{C_2}^{C_8} \MU_\RR$ (?? Check $\RR$ notation)
- Quotient by some elements, possibly losing structure, to obtain a quotient $Q$.
  The connecting version of $E_4^{hC_8}$ is $Q^{C_8}$.
  - It'd be interesting to know how much structure is lost here!
:::

:::{.question}
Some natural questions that arise here:

- What group actions (with various amounts of structure, e.g. $E_\infty$) act on tensor powers $\MU^{\tensor m}$?
- What structure exists on quotients of such tensor powers?
:::

:::{.remark}
Answering these amounts to building structured models for these connective spectra.
Understanding these two questions would allow computing fixed points of certain Morava $E\dash$theories?
Big question: do these tensor products admit $G\dash$actions beyond those which come from norms?
:::


:::{.remark}
Getting at these $\EO$ would be huge!
The HHR construction is spectacular but somehow only works at the prime $2$ and for cyclic groups??
:::




















