# Saturday, June 05

> Tasos Mouliunos: Perspectives on Nonabelian Hodge Theory (Talbot 2011)


For $(X, g)$ a Riemannian manifold, construct the de Rham complex \( \omega^*_X = C^\infty(X) \mapsvia{d} \Omega^1_X \mapsvia{d} \cdots \).
Using a metric we can define an adjoint operator $\delta: \Omega^* \to \Omega^*[-1]$.
Defining the Laplacian as $\laplacian \da \delta d + d\delta$, and a differential $n\dash$form is harmonic of $\laplacian \omega= 0$.
Recall that Hodge theorem: there is an isomorphism

??

So there are harmonic representatives for de Rham cohomology classes.

Assume $X$ is a smooth projective complex variety, or more generally a Kähler.
There is a decomposition \( \Omega_X^n \tensor_\RR \CC = \bigoplus _{p+q=n} \Omega^{p, q}_X \) which is $p$ exterior powers of \( \Omega^{1, 0} \) wedge with $q$ exterior powers of \( \Omega^{0, 1} \).
There is also a decomposition $d = \del + \delbar$ with $\del$ raises degree $p$ by 1 and $\delbar$ raises degree $q$ by 1.
There are formal adjoints to $\del, \delbar$, and one defines $\laplacian_d, \laplacian_{\del}, \laplacian_{\delbar}$ analogously.
There are Kahler identities:
\[
\laplacian_d = 2 \laplacian_{\del} = 2\laplacian_{\delbar}
.\]

> Todo: check


:::{.theorem title="?"}
There is a decomposition 
\[
H^n(X; \CC) \cong \bigoplus _{p+q = n} H^{p, q}(X)
.\]
where 
\[
H^{p, q} = D^p_{\Dolbeaut}(X; \Omega_X^q) = \mathcal{H}^{p, q}(X)
,\]
and the latter is the vector space of harmonic forms of degree $p, q$.
:::


:::{.remark}
This data yields a finite decreasining filtration $F$ together with a conjugate filtration $\bar F$ on $H^{p, q}$ where $F_p(H) \intersect \bar{F}_p(H) = H^n$ and yields a notion of *pure Hodge structure of weight $n$*.
:::


:::{.remark}
By GAGA, there is a correspondence between holomorphic and complex algebro-geometric data for nice enough sheaves.
This mixes 

- Topological data: $H^n(X; \CC)$
- Smooth data: $H^n_{\dR}(X)$ 
- Holomorphic/complex algebro-geometric data: the decomposition into harmonic forms.

Nonabelian Hodge theory is an attempt to categorify this fact.
:::


:::{.theorem title="?"}
There is an equivalence of categories
\[
\correspond{
  \text{Local systems of } \Vect_\CC \\ \text{on }X
}
&\mapstofrom
\correspond{
  \text{Complex vector bundles on } X \\ \text{with a flat connection}
}
\]
:::

:::{.remark}
The right-hand side can be identified with monodromy representations $\rho: \pi_1(X) \to \GL_n(\CC)$.

> Missed some stuff.

We'll want $H^1(X; \GL_n(\CC))$ to be the space of such representations.
How do we make sense of the Hodge decomposition here?
The answer: a vector bundle with a Higgs field, i.e. a Higgs bundle: a pair $(E, \theta)$ where $E$ is a complex bundle.
There are also *harmonic bundles* which interpolates between Higgs bundles and flat bundles.
Harmonic bundles: bundle with $\del, \delhar$ with algebraic operators $\theta, \bar\theta \in \Gamma(X, \Endo(E) \tensor \Omega^1)$.
One can fix a Hermitian metric so that $\del + \delbar$ is a unitary connection and $\theta + \bar\theta$ is self-adjoint.
:::

:::{.remark}
$\delbar$ defines a holomorphic structure on $E$ by the Koszul-Malgrange theorem, yielding a holomorphic bundle.
Given a bundle with flat connection and a Hermitian metric, one can define the data $D_K''$ needed for a Higgs structure, but then one needs to solve the system of PDEs $(D_K'')^2=0$.
Conversely, given a Higgs bundle $E$, namely $\theta'' = \theta + \delbar$, one can define a connection $D_K$ and if $(D_K)^2=0$ then this is a flat connection.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Nonabelian Hodge theorem"}
Let $X$ be a smooth complex projective variety.

- There is an equivalence of categories: harmonic bundles on $X$ and semisimple flat bundles (or equivalently $\pi_1(X)$ representations)
- There is an equivalence of categories:
  harmonic bundles and direct sums of stable Higgs bundles with vanishing Chern classes $c_1(E) = c_2(E) = 0$.

> Something else?

:::


:::{.remark}
Semi-stability is a condition on coherent subsheaves.
:::


:::{.remark}
Consider the degree 1 case of the Hodge correspondence.
$H^1(X; \GL_n(\CC))$ should be a moduli stack.
LEt $F: \CAlg_k^0 \to \Gpd$ be a functor, then it's representable by a stack, which is typically required to satisfy descent with respect to a topology on $\CAlg_k$ (a gluing condition, e.g. etale descent).
Can realize quotient stacks as a simplicial object in groupoids?
Can also take GIT quotients, $\spec R^G$ of the invariants.
:::


:::{.remark}
Use the functor of points to define the Betti moduli space.
Higgs moduli space: semistable Higgs bundles with vanishing Chern classes and a frame at $x$, i.e. $E \cong \CC^n$.
:::


:::{.remark}
There is an equivalence between $R_\dR$ and $R_B$, the de Rham and Betti moduli stacks?
Can get an equivalence of categories without underling topological spaces being homeomorphic?
:::


:::{.remark}
Semisimple flat bundles fixed by a $\GG_m$ action are those which underlie complex variations of Hodge structure.
These show up in relative de Rham cohomology.
:::












