# Homological Algebra



## What is it?

"Homology" as a word just denotes some kind of study of "sameness", which depends on what context you're in.

It arose out of topology, where we are interested in studying when two manifolds are the "same" up to certain kinds of maps. Most generally, we look at continuous maps between spaces, but one could also look at smooth maps (differential geometry), or holomorphic maps (complex analysis).

This sameness can be useful, because you may end up working with some complicated, unknown sort of object, but maybe you're only interested in the maps into or out of that object (for example, maybe smooth solutions to a differential equation on a manifold). If you know that there is another space that is the "same" up to smooth maps and much easier to deal with, you may be able to pull back results on the easier, well-known object into your complicated object and learn more about what you have!

When you just restrict to continuous maps, though, the discerning feature of spaces is their number of "holes". We say that two spaces are *homeomorphic* if they are equivalent up to continuous maps, which you can alternatively think of as saying that one space can be continuously deformed into the other one. The classic example is that the torus (i.e. the surface of a donut) is equivalent to a coffee cup, due to the fact that both are missing a "hole". 

We have this intuitive notion, but since we are mathematicians, we need to make that precise! And of course, generalize. There are many different ways of defining what exactly an "$n$-dimensional hole" should mean, and homology started off as one of them that wound up being useful and quite successful.



## How was homology first formulated?

There are many different ways to formulate the original homology, but they all roughly follow the same motto: "cycles mod boundaries". 

This originates from the world of manifolds, which are distinguished as topological spaces by their number of holes. One way to measure $n$-dimensional holes is to consider *k-cycles* on the manifold for $1\leq k \leq n$, which are a bit like cutting instructions. A 1-cycle is a set of points to remove, puncturing the manifold. A 2-cycle is a loop you could take scissors to, and in general a $d$-cycle is a $d$-dimensional submanifold. 

Manifolds may or may not have boundaries (**picture: manifold with boundary**), which means that cycles may have boundaries. So to measure the holes, we "mod out" by  those cycles that are actually just the boundary of higher-dimensional cycles. (**picture: quotienting as collapsing to a point**). We call the equivalence classes generated by this quotient **homology classes**, and say that two cycles in the same class are *homologous*.

For example, on $S^2$, every 1-cycle is homologous to zero - any path that is drawn can just be shrunk to a point, there is no obstruction. But on $T$, there are two non-trivial one-cycles - a meridian and the equator. So we can use this formulation to distinguish spaces!

As it turns out, when this is formalized, we can lift these kinds of facts about manifolds and boundaries and cycles over to the world of algebra in a functorial way. 

For a space $X$ and every $n$, one can form a group $H_n(X)$ called the *$n$-th homology group* that encodes the information of what $n$-dimensional holes are in $X$. We can assemble all of these together in a *graded* structure, something indexed by integers, and just generally look at $H(X) = H_0(X) \oplus H_1(X) \oplus \cdots$ where the grading just indicates the dimension to extract.

Intuitively, $H_0(X)$ tells you about the number of connected components, $H_1(X)$ is the number of "areas" missing from $X$, $H_2(X)$ is the number of "volumes" missing, and so on. For these examples, we read off the number by how many times $\ZZ$ appears in the group.

Some examples:

$H(S^1) = (\ZZ, \ZZ, 0, 0, \cdots)$
So we have 1 connected component, 1 one-dimensional holes, and that's it.

$H(B^2) = (\ZZ, 0, 0 , \cdots)$
So the filled in 2-dimensional ball has no holes.

$H(S^2) = (\ZZ, 0, \ZZ, 0, \cdots)$
So we have one connected component, no one-dimensional holes, and one two-dimensional holes.

$H_k(S^n) = \mathbf{1}[k = 0, n]$
In general, the $n$-sphere has one connected component and one $n$-dimensional hole.

## The Algebraic Formulation

In order to generalize and apply homology to other areas, we need to pull in a little bit of algebra. First, we need to talk about chain complexes. These can generally be formulated in what are called *abelian categories*, but we'll stay a little more concrete than that for now.

### Exactness

First let's talk a little bit about exactness. Consider a diagram such as this:

$0 \injective A \xrightarrow{f} B \xrightarrow{g} C \surjective 0$  

where $A,B,C$ are modules (or groups or rings or even vector spaces if you prefer), $f, g$ maps between them as indicated, where left end of the sequence is the inclusion of the trivial module into $A$ and the right end is a map sending every element to the single element of the trivial module.

We say this kind of sequence is **exact** if $\text{im} f = \ker g$. What does this mean for elements? Well, if $a\in A$, then $f(a) \in B$. But if $g$ is defined everywhere on $B$, then it's certainly defined for $f(a)$, and $f(a) \in \ker g$ means that $g(f(a)) = 0$ in $C$.

Equivalently, this just means that $(g\circ f)(a) = 0$ for every element in $A$, or that $g\circ f$ is the zero map.



One concrete benefit of this abstraction is that if we have

$0 \injective A \xrightarrow{f} B \surjective 0$,

then $f$ is an isomorphism, and $A \cong B$.



Another benefit is that if we have a diagram where an $h$ exists such as this

$0 \injective A \xrightarrow{f} B \xtofrom[h]{g} C \surjective 0$ 

where $g \circ h = \id_C$ then (in an *abelian category*) this sequence is said to *split*, and $B \cong A \oplus C$ for some notion of "direct sum" appropriate to the category you're working in, or $C \cong B /A$

This says that somehow $B$ is a composite object, with $A$ and $C$ sitting naturally inside of it (think of this like the rank-nullity theorem in linear algebra, where)

### Chain Complexes

A *chain complex* $\theset{(C_i, \del_i}$ is an exact sequence, where each $C_i$ is a module (or a group, if you want) and each $\del_i$ is a morphism (or homomorphism), which are usually denoted the *boundary maps* or *differentials*, satisfying the condition $\del_{n+1} \circ \del_{n} = 0$.

Diagrammatically, we have something like this:

$\cdots \xrightarrow{\del_{n+1}} A_{n+1} \xrightarrow{\del_{n}} A_n \into\xrightarrow{\del_{n-1}} A_{n-1} \cdots \xrightarrow{\del_{2}} A_1 \xrightarrow{\del_{1}} A_0 \xrightarrow{\del_{0}} A_{-1} \xrightarrow{\del_{-1}} \cdots$

