# Personal Statement

I am writing to express my interest in participating in this Summer's REU with MSRI-UP, involving the mathematics of data science.

I have been interested in the field of data science for quite some -- perhaps my first foray into the field was related to a lower division statistics class I took on a whim at a junior college, around Summer 2015 if I recall correctly, in which one of our major assignments was an open-ended project that used some of the basic tools of statistical analysis we had learned. For my project, I chose to peruse some data sets made available my public schools in California. In particular, I investigated potential correlations between certain academic signifiers (such as standardized test scores, average grade point average, and graduation/retention rates) and economic markers, such as the number of students on reduced/free lunch programs or in after-school extracurricular programs. This project was particularly interesting to me, having come from a low-income background, and what was especially enjoyable about it was being able to use mathematics to actually guide the analysis and form new hypotheses.

When I began junior college, I was primarily interested in obtaining programming skills -- I had done quite a bit of it in high school and was primarily investing in a new career path for myself. I was the first person in my immediate family to seriously pursue college, however, and I also supported myself, so my path through lower-division courses was a bit less than traditional. In any case, I began to take courses towards an A.S. in Computer Science, which involved taking the Calculus sequence.

Although I had a rocky start, as I began to work through the Mathematics sequence, I began to find myself drawn to the ideas and concepts I found in those courses. I found the theory itself very rewarding -- for example, I distinctly remember writing up review notes for a final in vector calculus, and being delighted to discover that Green's theorem was really just a special case of Stokes' theorem, which led me to spend hours trying to understand differential forms and manifolds. I found similar joy in things like discovering that discrete recurrence relations could be analyzed using techniques nearly identical to the study of ordinary differential equations, or that certain spaces of functions could be realized as infinite-dimensional vector spaces.

As such, I found myself wanting to study these kinds of things much more in-depth, which motivated me to apply for a transfer as a joint Math-Computer Science major and finish a Bachelor's degree. At this point, I found myself primarily wanting to take more courses in Pure Mathematics but also wanted to continue to learn the programming skills that might help me implement the things I learned. After taking courses like Real Analysis and Abstract Algebra, however, I found that I enjoyed these much more than the programming courses I was taking. As a result, I ended up taking as many math courses as I possibly could, almost half of what our department offers, and I've enjoyed being exposed to a wide variety of mathematical fields that are all tied together by common languages and theories.

Shortly after transferring, I secured a job at a small data science company in the area. I'd had some interest in the field since my aforementioned statistics course, and had also attended a few presentations and workshops on campus on topics like support vector machines and stochastic gradient descent. I often found myself wondering about the actual mathematical theory that went into them, however -- for example, I recall hearing about gradient descent, and spending quite a bit of time trying to understand exactly what kind of manifold such a thing would be defined on, and how it could even be recovered from a finite number of discretely sampled points. This was before our school offered a data science major, however, so I did not have much opportunity to actually study these things further.

At work, however, I gained some exposure to some of the actual methods used in applications -- different types of regression, LASSO, decision trees, random forests, etc. I work with our model-builder, who holds a Ph.D. in statistics, and in the intervening years, I have primarily helped with tweaking these models in R, collecting data an Python, and deploying them on the internet as API endpoints that businesses can feed their data into in order to receive predictions from these models.

In the intervening 2-3 years, I have continued to work part-time while taking classes full-time. I realized that many of the courses I took were just the tip of the mathematical iceberg, so to speak and that the truly cutting-edge mathematical work required a background involving graduate-level courses. So my interest in pursuing a graduate degree developed out of a desire to gain the mathematical background that might be required to understand the kinds of new techniques that might be developed over the next few decades, but also to really understand the mathematical theory that went into developing them, to understand their potential pitfalls or shortcomings, and even potentially make some kind of contribution myself.

I believe this program would be extremely beneficial for me because I am applying to graduate schools this year and would enjoy the chance to experience more research-level mathematics to better prepare me for what is expected in a graduate program. I also think I would be able to productively contribute -- I am currently working with a professor to complete a 2-quarter research project related to algebraic topology, and so will have some prior experience by the time this program starts. I also have had several courses in linear algebra, one in functional analysis, experience using all three of Python, Matlab, and R, and have taken 2 courses in basic machine learning techniques.

As such, I hope you will take my application into consideration. Thank you for your time,

-- Zack Garza
