# Journal #4 – Women in Modern America



# Name: <u>Zack Garza</u>



# “Society Proceedings” by Dr. Cushing

1. *What women’s cases are Cushing and the medical professionals discussing?*
   The article mentions several different afflictions, the first of which is **dysmenorrhea**, which might more colloquially be described as menstrual cramps, particularly during or around the time of a period. It is now known that while this may be common in younger women, its occurence later in life may be an indicator of other medical issues. The article also describes the women as having intense pain in both ovaries, experiencing rapid weight loss, and suffering from depression. As a result, the woman was unable to attend to her daily activities, and was in such pain that she specifically sought out the doctor and asked for an operation of some sort to lessen the pain and adverse effects she was experiencing. Upon examination, she was found to have enlarged fallopian tubes, as well as enlarged ovaries, and she in fact had a small cyst on one of her ovaries as well. The doctors also report that her clitoris was "enlarged and congested", and found her to be in a "deplorable" condition that they later describe as melancholia.
2. *How does Dr. H. I. Bowditch describe one of Dr. Cushing’s patients before and after her operation?*
   Before the operation, they describe the patient to be in a deplorable condition, saying that he found her a "poor, miserable, wretched being on the verge of suicide." They go on to say that the surgery was a singular success, and that the surgery changed her completely. They say that although the had some tenderness in her pelvic region, her manner was "quiet and pleasant", and that she had "no sexual passion". They later describe how a similar case had a similar outcome, but one doctor points out that it may be a sort of placebo effect based on the moral consequences of the surgery. For example, early in the article, they ascribe the cause of her depression to be a belief that she had committed an unpardonable sin and was eternally damned. They go on to say that the patient described her own mental state as though a "window has been opened in heaven." In their later reports, it seems as though they believe they had averted some kind of true mental illness, possibly something that would be devolved into insanity without their intervention. One doctor even goes as far to say that even if there were significant risks associated with such a surgery, up to and including the risk of death, such a risk should be taken simply for the remarkable mental improvement that resulted. This is a very bizarre point of view from a modern perspective, that somehow a purely anatomical surgery should be so intricately linked to mental state, and that surgery (and possibly mutilation, if the patient did not in fact have "diseased ovaries") should be undertaken for purely psychological benefits. This comes off as a genuinely disturbing and unnerving stance to take, and highlights many of the things wrong with a society that so heavily prescribes certain forms of morality that induce such guilt when they are breached.
3. *What would make women of this time “bad”, according to this primary source medical journal?*
   Among the symptom list early in the article, the doctor mentions that the woman had been a "confirmed masturbator" and could not attend to her duties, whatever they may have been. This hints at the underlying moral structure of this period, and seems to be cast in a negative life, so one might assume that this is something society might be uniformly labeled "bad" at the time. Of course, this is still the case in society at large today, but it does seem that progress is being made outside of conservative religious groups - although it is still taboo, talking about such things has at least entered the mainstream in some fashion (e.g. in stand up comedy, "The Vagina Monologues", or even magazines aimed primarily at women that celebrate sexuality in a public fashion, which can be found in just about any grocery store checkout lane!) The fact that masturbation would have been considered "bad" at this time is also supported by the article describing the doctor's first suggestion of clitoridectomy, or excision of the clitoris. As described later in the article, when they highlight all of her positive characteristics post-surgery, they mention sexual passion. This implicitly suggests that whatever sexual passion had been present beforehand had been something negative, or something to be cured in some sense. They also mention her being "clothed" afterwards, which I interpret to mean wearing more modest clothing, which again implicitly places negative judgment on whatever outfit choices she had made pre-surgery. Interestingly, they also mention her being "quiet" as a positive result, which suggests that being outspoken was somehow a bad or negative quality in women at the time.
4. *Why would these doctors believe that clitoridectomy and/or removal of the ovaries to be beneficial to these “bad” women?*
   From the details provided in this article and the general tone, it seems to hint that these there was more going on with these operations than simply medical, anatomical issues. It doesn't appear that there's any evidence to suggest in this case that the clitoridectomy would have actually cured her condition in any way - rather, it seems that they considered it almost entirely for behavioral reasons, and that by performing this operation they could alleviate her "condition" of being a "confirmed masturbator", despite never alluding to any of the ways this could possibly be linked with any of her actual medical issues. A similar sentiment is reflected later in the article, where one doctor goes so far as to suggest the removal of ovaries simply for its behavioral effects on the women in question, although another doctor recommends against doing so unless they are actually diseased. This hints at the fact that these doctors were stepping pretty far out of line in general, potentially even performing unnecessary (potentially dangerous) operations simply to exact some kind of moral control, or as some way to bend women's temperaments to what they considered good or proper. It would seem that whether it was overt or not, these doctors looked down on the fact that women were sexually expressing themselves, and being in a position of power, heavily abused it in order to carry out their own social or moral agendas. In particular, the doctors' glowing description of the patient as modest and quiet after the operation reflects this fact, that these qualities were somehow preferable in women, as opposed to them being outspoken or having the same sexual urges that any human being might.
   ​
5. *How does this attitude toward these women reflect the view of women at this time? How do we see the same attitude toward women in present day?*
   I think this ultimately enforces the "seen, not heard" viewpoint of women - that people at this time saw women as fitting into specific roles and did not want them to deviate from that. In this day, this would have revolved around being a good daughter, then immediately transitioning into being a good wife for another man, and ultimately serving quietly as a good mother and/or homemaker. Common views at this time did not support ideas like women having hobbies - outside of, say, the kinds of things you might see from the wives in "Madmen", things that were "proper" or harmless hobbies like horse riding or reading clubs with other wives. These attitudes almost directly reflect general political attitudes towards women - much in the same way that these doctors seemed to value this woman being complacent and quiet, so too did society shun women from having a voice or an opinion in political matters or larger issues. This was a prevalent attitude throughout the 1900s, and is still present in many different forms today. Perhaps a prime example is from last year elections, particularly in the debates between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. Despite Hillary being an immensely professional woman with quite a bit of political experience, she was often disparaged or ignored due to her gender. This was especially noteworthy during debates, where she would often be interrupted or have her arguments shot down, often completely dominated in conversation entirely. Not only was the fact that this kind of treatment was allowed to happen an indictment of the professionalism of the structures surrounding presidential candidacy, but it also served to highlight how much this attitude still persists in the public as people expressed their thoughts and opinions after seeing it happen in such a public way. There were several instances where the two candidates would even agree on an issue, while certain groups would disagree with it when they heard it from a woman and then agree when they later heard the same idea from a man. Even in these arenas, among relatively educated and professional people, there is still a notion that women do not have as important a voice in political issues, or are somehow less informed or have inferior solutions in some way, while in this day and age it seems almost bizarre and archaic to classify these kinds of things along gender lines at all, as opposed to things like education, experience, or qualifications.


# “The Birth Control Movement in Puerto Rico”

6. *Describe the “great biological law” that Thomas Malthus believes in.*
   As per the article, this was a belief that "rich were genetically superior to the poor." This is taken farther than the usual sort of class elitism, as it supports some notion that people who were doing well somehow deserved to do well, and conversely that those who were poor somehow deserved it. For Malthus, there was also a religious component to it, for he believed that the great plagues were in fact sent by God to eradicate the poor population. At this time, there were a variety of laws that resembled the precursors to modern social systems and were meant to support or assist the poor population, and Malthus fought to have these programs shut down and the laws stricken - he felt that helping the poor was simply a way of rewarding their "poorness", and that it would encourage such behavior. More than that, though, there was also an eugenic component to his stance, for he believed that encouraging the poor would lead to them having more children, thus spreading their "poor genes", to the detriment of society. In this way, his ideas were used to "explain" poverty, which had the effect of simply giving people reasons to express many different types of racism under the guise of classism - this was perhaps not better by any stretch of the imagination, but very probably more socially acceptable in many cases. These ideas were applied to third world countries, enabling other countries to link their ethnicity to their poorness, which would later be used to justify many instances of further colonialism and wars.
7. *How does Eugenics classify people? What problems does that create?*
   It primarily classifies people on the basis of race, since this is as close as one can get to classifying by "bloodlines" or "genes" - this is very much like the heritage vs. phenotype distinction, where it is much easier to group based on the latter. The primary issue with this is that it implicitly puts into place some kind of race hierarchy in the minds of proponents. This has two aspects - one, they are led to believe that some races are inferior, and that they are in their position in life because of there race. At best, this justifies not supplying the usual amount of help a normal, empathic human being might extend to another, but at worst it serves to systematically keep these races in positions of less power and privilege. The 2nd aspect, which has proven to be extremely dangerous, is the dual belief that some races are in fact *superior* to others. In the best cases, they might feel that these races deserve good things simply based on the circumstances of their birth, but at its worst it may be manifested as a misguided desire to try to "improve humanity" and ensure that only the best of the best are reproducing and populating. Taken to extremes, this can even lead to genocide, as it inevitably did in World War 2. However, even in less extreme cases, this can be a problematic stance - it can be used to correlate intelligence with race, or aspects such as criminality, which can be used to incriminate people across generations. Even today, things like associating race with criminality are immense social issues, as evidenced by the multiple murders of suspected criminals on the basis of their skin color over the past several years. 
8. *In what ways does the Eugenic ideology influence the U.S. birth control movement?*
   It promoted class inequality - for example, the article mentions that once the idea of "selective breeding" became widely accepted, while birth control remained a privilege for middle/upper class white women for example, it became mandatory for poor women, women of color, and essentially anyone that could be deemed to have "undesirable" qualities that would be passed to their progeny. This essentially becomes a form of forced sterilization, forcibly limiting the ability of entire races and classes of people to build lives and families for themselves. It not only strips people of their autonomy and dignity, but if carried out, can be a death sentence for entire cultures and ways of life. It was also applied to those with physical or mental deformities, since it was believed that essentially all of these conditions were associated with genetics at the time - however, this is of course problematic because many types of deformities are *not* passed down, and are just a small statistical certainty that will appear in any population. Moreover, many of these people can still go on to lead happy, fulfilling lives, potentially even having families of their own in the absence of such eugenic policies, with absolutely zero harm to the rest of the population - in fact, such people can still make valuable contributions to society!
9. *Who was birth control available for? Who was it deemed mandatory for? Why?*
   According to the article, birth control was a privilege for relatively rich white women, while it was eventually deemed mandatory for non-white women and even certain white women, presumably those the exhibited the "undesirable" qualities of the time as discussed previously. Things like sterilization also served as a form of birth control, and many states put into place programs for mandatory sterilization of "mentally challenged" or "unstable" people. These eventually became a standard sort of program, affecting over 45,000 people who were often admitted to facilities simply to be sterilized and then immediately released. Sterilization was also carried out against poor women of color, such as the case mentioned of two young African-American girls who were sterilized in their early teenage years due to the suspicion that they would become unwed mothers.
10. *What is considered by conservative eugenicists to be part of the reason for the Puerto Rican “backwardness”?*
    Their primary explanation was "the tropical climate and their inferior stock". As discussed in class, the tropical climate would have a tendency to induce the need for less clothing, due to the extreme heat for greater parts of the day. This is in contrast to predominantly white areas such as Europe or New England, which had very cold climates for much of the year that required many different types and layers of clothing. Although this variable (the clothing) is almost purely a result of geological location, it was used as way to paint and portray those closer to the equator as "savages" or "backward". The "inferior stock" portion is just continuation of the eugenic ideas mentioned previously - they somehow came to the conclusion that the people there were backwards because that was somehow in their nature and due to their genetics. This led to them pursuing sterilization and emigration for the Puerto Rican problem of overpopulation.
11. *Why did the Church and the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party oppose birth control and sterilization?*
    Part of the reason the Church opposed birth control in general was because they felt that it somehow made having intercourse an "okay" thing for people to do by removing the consequences. Many religions, and particularly the Catholic church, subscribe to a belief that sexual relations are to be confined to marriage, and solely for the purpose of procreation, and more generally is just a taboo thing to think or talk about and is considered a sin in many instances. The availability of birth control subverts this narrative by detaching procreation from sex, which the Church would believe to encourage people into "sinful" activities. In Puerto Rico in particular, though they were also opposed to sterilization and the way birth control was being applied, because they recognized it as "part of a North American plan of genocide." They felt that sterilizing the poor was masking underlying societal problems such as overpopulation and economic disparity, and that these actions would preclude any forms of political reform or revolt to alleviate these issues. 
12. *Explain Clarence Gamble’s interest in Puerto Rico and his role in the country*.
    He played a large part in the development of the birth control movement, beginning to take a role when Roosevelt put an end to the federal aid going to Puerto Rico to supply these efforts.  He developed the Maternal and Child Health Association, hired on many of previously federally funded staff, and began to offer the same services - however, his goals were ostensibly more in line with obtaining profit than addressing societal issues. He promoted products developed by his own companies, as opposed to safer and more reliable alternatives, and used these clinics to essentially test his products on a poor and unsuspecting vulnerable population of women. This all circumvented FDA approval, however they also provided valuable services to many poor people as a result. Although it was shut down, much like many other efforts in Puerto Rico, its influence was in how these facilities systematically collected information, evaluating a variety of methods, and clearly demonstrating that there was a real need for these types of services and products among the population. This ultimately led to legislation involving birth control and sterilization that made it legal for doctors to provide information freely to their patients.


# Foner, pgs. 548-565

13. *Discuss the role of women’s spending, and their importance as consumers.*
    During the Progressive era, women became more visible in general, in public places and both workers and consumers, which was a radical departure from their previous, dominantly domestic roles that kept them behind closed doors much of the time. Many different types of jobs opened up that allowed women workers, while simultaneously there were many women from newly immigrated families that joined the workforce as well. This put money in their pockets, which didn't necessarily all have to go back towards some patriarch or head of the household, which meant that women had money to spend as well. As a natural result, companies looking to make money realized that these new spenders were emerging, and sought to specifically target them as a group of consumers. This is perhaps most strongly evidenced by the rise of what I would call "domestic" or "household" goods, things that were specifically pitched with the average homemaker in mind such as dishwashers, vacuum cleaners, and laundry appliances. Whether or not this accurately reflected what women were buying at the time, or indeed whether or not it reflected an actually prevalent lifestyle, these products marked the beginning of advertising directly to women as a group of consumers in their own right. This was continued in advertisements such as the Palmolive facial soap ad, which not only began to feature imagery of women, but attempted to define some kind of "ideal" lifestyle for women as well.
14. *Why was Duncan’s new style of dance so important for women of the era who identified as feminists?*
    Although it appears that very little of her original dances were captured in photos or video footage, it is described as a very fluid and flowing style that is meant to emanate from the solar plexus, where Duncan believed the dancer's soul to be housed. As such, all of her movements started with the movement of this part of her body, allowing the rest to follow. It would not be surprising if this emblematic form of "freeing one's soul" struck a chord with nascent feminists, blazing the way for women to freely express whatever they felt their true selves to be. Since the ideals of early feminists were tied to many different kinds of freedoms, including the realization of women as sexual beings, these dances provided a keystone for women - Duncan was a women expressing herself in a way that included using her body, and I would imagine that this would serve as a bold step forward at the time and a sort of role model for women just being introduced to the ideas of discovering and expressing themselves freely. Although not mentioned in the text, the history of dance at the time was very much bound to very specific sorts of rules - things like the Waltz were recently in vogue, which demanded very specific and rigid steps and movements, and dances themselves were less a form of entertainment than they were a sort of social function, a common part of certain social events. So in this sense, Duncan's dances very much broke from these traditions, introducing much more free-flowing, unrestricted movements, which threw aside many previous conventions. This sentiment lines up exactly what what feminists were trying to accomplish at the time, and so could have been key in cementing and spreading their key ideas.
15. *How was the creation of the Society of American Indians, and the Wassaja important for Native Americans at the time?*
    Perhaps the most obvious reason this was an important landmark for Native Americans was that this was perhaps one of the first major organizations dedicated to expressing their wants and needs at a larger level. Much like the feminist movement served to unify many voices and give them a unified front to enact real social change, the Society served a similar role. Very recently prior to its established, many small and large-scale wars had been waged between the expanding American states and the native populations. This organization was formed in the aftermath of these battles, at a time when the white majority that had moved westward held control over most native American lands and their territories were incorporated into the newly formed states and generally subjected to most (if not all) of their laws. At this time, it is doubtful that there would have been any native Americans that had a hand in actually creating these laws, and so this organization was important in that its voice was entirely provided by these native populations and that it was a space that was not subject to white control of opinions and ideas. The Wassaja was especially important, since print was a powerful medium at this point in time, and so having a newsletter sourced by Native American voices was a powerful tool for them to express themselves, their ideals, and potentially enact political and societal change. The establishment of these two both served a critical role in helping Native American populations make their voice heard, to unify themselves and begin to regain control of their lives and cultures.
16. *Explain techniques that suffragettes used to campaign.*
    The movement began in the "elite" classes in the 1890s, but had spread to many other classes of women by the early 1900s and gained enough momentum to become a social movement. This was evidenced by the establishment of the NWSA, which were the primary campaigners in establishing the right of women to vote nationwide. They used a wide variety of techniques, including advertising, publicity, and even entertainment. Parades were held, signs and billboards posted, and buttons and badges were handed out to people at many of their events. A key part of their techniques is that they were very public, and brought the issues to the people. This served to highlight the fact that it was, in fact, an issue - it is entirely plausible that many lawmakers and especially many men of the era would not have put much thought into it otherwise, since it would have simply been continuing a long tradition of holding central voting power in the states. Although these campaigns began at the state level and succeeded in a number of Western states, they found that these efforts were impeded as the movement spread Eastwards, and so they eventually switched to campaigning at the national level.
17. *What are the goals of the “maternalist reforms”?*
    These policies were based on a growing demand for the government to simultaneously support the role of women as mothers as well as economically independent entities. This was supported by those who favored traditional domestic roles, but was interestingly enough also supported by feminists, who saw it as a way to lessen the reliance of women on men for their basic needs and would be an avenue to help poor mothers and children. Traditionalists favored it as a way to strengthen the traditional family structure, as well as the bonds between mothers and children. This inspired a mass movement towards government regulations that supported poor mothers and their children, particularly those without some form of male support, which helped them gain a form of financial independence. These pensions became a hallmark example of these further maternalist reforms, which helped support women in an way that did not necessarily tie them to dependence on something like a father or a husband to survive. Policies like this continue to this day, and although I wouldn't call the situation of many single mothers "ideal" by any means, there are now many standard programs such as WIC in place that serve as support structures and allow women in these positions to make an life for themselves and their children. These provide a valuable service for women, and especially mothers, who in the absence of these reforms might be pressured into (for example) chaotic or even abusive situations if they had to solely rely on (say) their child's errant father or something for support. This kind of thing gives women an option and potentially a way out of these positions, without having to compromise their desire to provide for their children while raising them in a safe way.


# “Cooking Up Lives”

18. *What role does food play in different cultures, and what roles do women play in that?*
    Feminists were initially reluctant to broach these issues, as food was tied to the domesticated imagery they were trying to throw off. However, as the author notes, much information can be gleaned from the history of food - by looking at what people are eating, and particularly who is preparing and serving it. This introduces stratifications across gender lines, but also across class and caste lines as well. For example, in American culture, the image of the "nuclear family" often involved the wife/mother serving in a domestic role, particularly being the key person involved in preparing, serving, and cleaning for meals. In this case, we see the stratification across gender lines. It could also be that no one in the family makes food, at that this task is relegated to hired labor or servants - this provides the stratification across classes and castes. Food is intimately tied to culture, as tastes and recipes can vary greatly even within small homogeneous regions, and certainly much more across the usual geopolitical boundaries and racial lines we are used to. Moreover, food can also play an intergenerational role, as people often tout certain recipes that are passed down through families for generations - indeed, we even see this in the advertising of certain types of foods in the mainstream today. Women play a particularly important role when it comes to food, since so many cultures tie domestic duties (such as food preparation) to femininity. As the article mentions, this is not always the case however - there are many cultures where it is the norm for the male head of the household to prepare the meals, which is perhaps tied to culture norms of being a provider.
19. *In what ways does food mark people as ‘different’ from their peers?*
    As mentioned above, food tastes and preferences can vary widely from region to region, and even from family to family if there is a strong tradition of particular types of meals or ingredients. Meals are often a shared, social experience however, where the meal is often prepared a single or particular style - and if there is a disparate group eating who have different taste preferences, this can quickly introduce a social division. People are often very emotionally tied to and invested in their favorite types of foods - even though the types of foods may be tied to regional artifacts. For example, many Asian dishes include rice because this is one of the major agricultural outputs of the region, and usually include fish as a result of proximity to the ocean and economic influences that preferentially push trade routes inland rather than overseas. However, someone in Ireland may have completely different tastes due to the fact that their abundant supply of potatoes, which shapes the types of recipes and meals that would even be formed in the first place. People from either location would begin eating these foods at an early age, usually having them prepared by an elder family member and sharing them with their family. This weaves in many different types of emotional ties to the style and types of foods that a person eats, while another's tastes could be shaped entirely differently based on their regional location. There is also the impact of availability of things like spices, seasonings, creams or sugars, or even livestock. All of these come together in a way that is so intimately tied to location that it can be rare for two people from different places to have precisely the same tastes, inducing a sense of difference and strangeness when they travel to a new location with new cuisine.
20. *Can food serve as a conversation starter? How or how not?*
    In many ways it can - for example, the chapter mentions a girl who takes her traditional Japanese lunch with her to school in a Bento box. She was embarrassed to eat the rice ball, for example, and this could possibly be because it could induce questions about what she was eating, where she was from, and so on. In this case, such conversations could take on either positive or negative tones, depending on the person asking. It can present an opportunity to talk about and share differing cultures, but can also be another way to point out the differences in someone that is trying to assimilate in a new culture while simultaneously preserving their own. Later in the chapter, it talks about how food itself can be the form of communication, the way parents and children share their bonds in an unspoken way when the parent prepares and send meals to the child for example. Of course, eating in general is a social activity in many contexts, which makes it an interesting way to meet and speak with new people. Many modern social events include food, modern dating often involves sharing a dinner, and things like shared work lunches or dinner parties among friends are not uncommon. Especially when these involve home-cooked meals, the food itself can be the source of deep and rich conversation about lifestyle, upbringing, or heritage.


# Feminist Food Justice

21. *How does food insecurity affect various households differently?*
    The article specifically mentions instances of countries where the majority of most women's labor goes into the unpaid preparation of the food needed to support their own households. This may include working in agricultural capacities, hauling water or wood, etc, while men are relatively free to produce goods for consumption and take on paid roles. This prevents these women from making significant progress on their own goals and ideals. However, the scarcity of food can be quite a relative thing - in these countries, where they are already struggling to meet their basic needs, any small turbulence in the availability of their food source could push them into a situation of going hungry or not eating for a period of time. Even absent such dips, there are still issues such as malnutrition and underweight pregnancies that lead to multiple other health issues. Meanwhile, any food scarcity for someone in middle-class America, for example, would usually mean having to select different types of foods, rather than completely going without. Even for lower classes and extremely poor individuals, there is still some social structure in place that can be used to provide some of these basic food-related needs. So there is sort of a "floor" to floor security for people in these countries, where although it is not an enviable position to be in, basic needs of survival could possibly be met. In third world households, however, their day-to-day conditions may not even cross this "floor" threshold in the first place, which puts them in a very insecure place in terms of survival.
22. *What is food availability and what does the definition lack?*
    According to the chapter, availability refers to the ability of a country to obtain enough food to meet the baseline dietary needs of its citizens on a large-scale level. This has several flaws, the most prominent one mentioned being the lack of regard from where the food originates or by whom it is prepared. It also does not address issues of distribution, in two senses of the word: first, in how it is distributed to people in the first place. For example, the UN regularly supplies certain African countries with regular shipments of 50-100lb bags of rice. However, these are delivered via airplane to specific spots, and it is then the responsibility of people in need to travel and obtain this food. This results in people, including women and children, often malnourished and weak, travelling up to 20 miles by foot to obtain these bags, and carrying it back to their homes in the same way. Such a definition of food availability does not take into account these kinds of nuances - the food is there, but how effectively is it getting to the actual people? And how effective is it at alleviating the actual problem of hunger, in a long-term way? The second nuance is in how the food is distributed or clumped up among the population. A nation could have ample food for its population, but if only the most well-off 50% of people have access to it while the remaining 50% are unable to afford or obtain it, there is certainly a problem of availability that is not captured in the definition. It does not take into account how accessible this food is, as a function of those who need it most.
23. *How would female-centered food justice benefit food insecurity & availability?*
    The chapter points out the link between smaller forms and a higher likelihood of women being the primary laborers when it comes to producing and serving food, particularly those from marginalized groups. It calls for creating a supportive environment at the local and national level for these women farmers, in terms of having funding a legislation in place to support and protect them as well as to ensure physical spaces are safe and supportive for farming and food production, even in urban areas. As the writer states, this helps connect not only people to food but people to one another, as they share these spaces and resources for a common goal. They go on to state that this would help solidify and unify communities, to held them establish the kinds of support systems needed to make food and resources available to people in an equitable way, and would be a humane and sustainable alternative to current options. This would also help address the problem of the undervaluing of the amount of labor that women put into such food production. Moreover, building these ties would provide a strong foundation and help bring increased knowledge and efficiency to the efforts of these laborers, allowing them to produce more resources and use them more efficiently. All of these factors together combine to bring up the baseline levels of food availability, and provide a kind of safety net that increases its security as well.