# Journal #5 – American Involvement in Latin America

# Name: <u>Zack Garza</u>

# “The Storm that Swept Mexico” – first 15 min

1. *What are the “two Mexico’s”?*
   As the video explains, this is partly due to the extremely large size of Mexico - although the overall history was relatively homogenous up to a point, key differences between physically separated spaces became apparent. In particular, the northern portion of Mexico embraced trade and culture with the United States, motivated by the idea that this would propel them economically. The video even goes as far as to say that the Northern portion was all but another colony or territory associated to the United States in terms of economics. There is also a mention of differences in how natives were treated, including exploitation and racism.
2. *Porfirio Diaz*
   He wanted Mexico to be a modern nation, and pushed for technology and infrastructure in major cities. Under his rule, the country's culture was predominantly influenced and focused on Europe and European ideals. However, his rule marginalized many minority and indigenous groups, which is where discontent began to arise. The rural system was poor and the hacienda system was said to be a "tragedy", this coupled with the fact that his rule was based on military contributed to this discontent. His economic policies largely helped the wealthy owners of haciendas at the expense of the rural population, who were left either without work or forced to work on the perilous and abusive haciendas. He essentially served as a dictator, declaring himself into power until the revolution that ended his rule. He is seen as a hero by some, as a traitor to others - "the man who gave Mexico away to the foreigners."
3. *What do the cientificos think is Mexico’s biggest problem?*
   This was a circle of power surrounding Porfirio that controlled much of the country's wealth, and particularly pieced together contracts for foreign investments. They believed that the biggest problem faced by Mexico was the "backward Indian population". They heralded themselves as technocrats, housed in the center of power in Mexico City, and were the ones that implemented most economic policies without regard to anyone outside of the circle. The elitism and racism caused them to identify these racial and/or social differences as the biggest problem of the time.
4. *Who did Mexico look toward for artistic influence during the Porfiriato*
   Under his rule, Mexican culture was shaped and influenced by European ideals. Along with the push for industrialization was a desire to be more European, or to strive to emulate the white culture of the time, despite the fact that they had gained their independence and had an opportunity to shape their new identity. This mirrors the same type of emulation of European countries that occurred in the United States when black slaves were freed or when new immigrants arrived - the "high culture" that many of these groups strove towards was nearly always related to the culture of rich, white, upper class people, and often reflected European ideas and norms well after America's own revolution.
5. *What are haciendas, and what control did they have in the economy*
   These were large estates, made of land provided either through land grants, or sometimes purchased or even stolen by the owners. They were feudal in nature in terms of how they were operated, and contributed a large amount of wealth to the country. The owners had total power over those who worked the land, many were sugar plantations with terrible conditions for the workers. Although some payments were in place, so this wasn't outright "slavery" by definition, for all intents and purposes it was a form of slavery - one might think of this situation as an evolution of traditional slavery, which maintains the core idea that profits are made off of the backs of the workers. It also continues the tradition of poor working conditions, often grueling, with no regard for the actual humanity of the workers, and it can even be said to enslave the workers an an economic sense of the word - after all, if one is forced to choose between having no work and dying or working for a pittance, there really isn't much of a choice at all.
6. *Describe the working conditions of the Mexican rural poor*
   They were forced to work, although paid a small sum for their labor. However, there was physical violence involved on the part of the foremen, who would often whip workers to force their labor. This is part of what led to revolution, as well as the formation of groups of bandits who refused to work in these conditions - these were people that predominantly joined the revolution as soon as it broke out, along with those who were stripped of their land in the name of progress. These were also often indigenous people, the mexican indians, and there were numerous social issues as well - for example, as recounted in the video, they would often have to cowtow to Spaniards who accosted them on the street.
7. *How did the working conditions of many Mexicans reflect what we have discussed about the Black codes, American slavery, and immigrants working in the U.S.*
   The conditions in Mexico exactly parallel the kinds of conditions all of these groups were subjected to, and I think the only major differences that arise are really just due to the different time periods in which they occurred, in that they are really tied together in one long string of the oppression of workers in various forms. It seems like in the early days of American slavery, there was a kind of cultural norm that made it somehow acceptable to have slaves work in terrible conditions for no pay. Really, this idea just evolved over time, and as slavery was abolished in other parts of the world, groups of people that profited from these systems simply found ways around the technicalities of slavery. The means are different - they had to work with government agencies, in this case Diaz, in order to elicit the right economic conditions that would provide some illusion of choice and yet simultaneously force people into nearly identical conditions as had been seen in earlier forms of slavery, and so the ends were nearly identical.
8. *Taft’s Dollar Diplomacy in Latin America*
   This was his version of economic development in Latin America, but was ill-informed - his knowledge came from advisors who primarily sought to create or protect the interests of American companies in Mexico. In the late era, Americans had many economic interests and investments in Mexico, in the form of railroads, mines, and land ownership, all of which were interests that they sought to protect. One speculation from the video was that Americans had such huge investments in Mexico that their total value outweighed what Mexicans themselves owned. However, Taft's administration was largely ignorant of actual issues or conditions in Latin America.
9. *Importance of the strike in Cananea, Mexico* 
   This was partially taken on by miners, whose working conditions were poor and said to be intolerable. These workers included Mexican and American miners, however the Americans made twice as much as their Mexican counterparts. After a strike (partially caused by this inequality) resulted in the death of around 20, shockwaves were sent out and the impression was that the their leaders could not really control domestic affairs. Coupled with outrage at these deaths, this rippled out to cause strikes in many other industries - textile mills, tobacco factories, and railroad yards, as well as among landowners and businessmen who are all dissatisfied with the country's leadership.


# “Black in Latin America: Brazil”

10. *Tell me about the numbers of Africans that were brought to Brazil and tell me how that contributes to Brazil’s racial/ethnic complexity*
    4.8 million slaves came from African, with 1.5m arriving in Brazil, with now over 75m black people there (the 2nd largest black population in the world). One easy comparison to make here is that the current population in the US is around 300m people, and most people are aware of the multitude of different cultures, societies, and regional nuances that accompany such a large population. With this in mind, it is no surprise that when there is a population in a single city that is nearly 1/4 of the size of the total US population, that there would be a huge amount of diversity among different subsets of the population, and yet also a sense of togetherness and unity from a common shared heritage and a close physical proximity. Its inhabitants now are descendants of Africans, Europeans, and indigenous populations - moreover, with such a large number of Africans transplanted here, it would have had to have been the case that among the 1.5m there were a multitude of different groups from various parts of Africa, each with their own set of traditions and cultural history. This supports their unique position of having over 100 different types of designations among themselves, while still all identifying as a common people.

11. *Tell me about Capoeira and its cultural significance*
    This is significant because it is an example of how the original slave population not only supported and enabled the culture of their masters, but also created culture and traditions of their own. This is a mix of martial arts and dance, an offshoot of African traditions that was altered and evolved when slaves needed a way to defend themselves. They were not allowed to organize, but this form of dance gave them a way to strengthen and practice forms of defense. They disguised their training as a dance - they would train, and when the cavalry approached, they would switch from fighting to dancing to trick them. It is significant now in many ways, one of which is in its traditional value, but another is its practical value, as the Capoeira mentions that it is also used to keep youth off of the streets.

12. *Tell me about Candomblé and its cultural significance*
    It represents the mixing of cultures in Brazil, which not only helps African religions keep their own traditions and gods alive through song and dance, but enables a form of multiplicity and blending between all of the various different original religions into something that is uniquely tied to their identity as Brazilians.

13. *Tell me about Brazil’s attitudes towards Blackness- why are they so complicated?*

14. *Tell me about Xica da Silva and what her example tells us about the complexities of race relations in Brazil (and Latin America)*
    She was originally the slave of one of the wealthiest men in Diamantina, who was freed and went on to become herself one of the wealthiest and powerful women there and is now well known across the country. She acted very much like a white woman, erasing her African heritage, and her children also embraced "the whitening" because it was the way to progress socially in that society. This is in drastic contrast to slavery in the US - in Diamantina, as the narrator says, "she could almost escape her blackness", while he also says that the complexity of her life would almost have been unimaginable for a slave in the US.

15. *Tell me about Branqueamento and what it tells us about race and power*
    This is roughly translated as "whitening", and was an effort in Brazil to filter down the black culture in some way - they felt that the colored population posed a problem, and believed that the path to being "civilized" as a country involved becoming more white, i.e. adopting practices similar to those of white societies, as well as having an actual, physically whiter population. One way this was attempted was by bribing white Europeans to immigrate to Brazil. In a similar vein, many practices such as the Capoeira and Candomblé were denounced as barbaric or uncivilized, anything that was seen as black. The government persecuted those participating in their efforts, and tried to justify stopping them in the same of "civilizing".

16. *Manuel Carino*
    He emphasized the role of the African, as opposed to immigrants, since he felt that Brazil had *already* been civilized by the African population. He felt that the black presence was fundamental to the identity of Brazil, and was emblematic as a voice of support and acceptance in a time when the government was trying to whitewash their society. Part of his legacy is that he made an important stand that encouraged the black population to not just accept their presence, but to be proud of their heritage and culture and to celebrate it for what it is instead of trying to replace or augment it.

17. *Gilberto Freyre* 
    He is Brazil's most famous intellectual, and was one of the first to propagate the ideas of plurality and the end of racism in Brazil. He speaks about the open mixing of slave and master populations in the early days of Brazil, and contrasts it to relations in the US which he viewed generally frowned upon and to be kept secret and furtive.

18. *Complications about race and class in Brazil today* 
    It is believed to be much more complicated than what the romantic stories might portray. For example, in visiting Rio de Janeiro, the narrator mentions that this is one of the wealthiest cities, and also points out that the black population is much, much smaller. He also points out that there is very little portrayal of black people in the media, including a shot of a magazine rack full of covers with white women. In his interview, it is mentioned that there is a strong national narrative that racial inequality doesn't exist, which makes it all the harder to talk about the fact that it actually does - even in the poorest neighborhoods that are predominantly black, the smaller white population ends up with much better opportunities. He talks about how Brazil was actually one of the last countries to abolish slavery, and how they were forced to live under the lie of racial democracy, which is evidenced by the color of the people in prisons and the clear separations of wealth along color lines. It is also apparent among the black population, and is evidenced by differences in where black families live and what educational opportunities are available to them.

19. *Issues with affirmative action in Brazil’s universities, and the opposing opinions*
    Brazil's version was that 20% of positions would be set aside for black students. There is a debate about whether or not it is reverse-racism of some form. Some argue that the university has to answer to the public in general, and not simply cater to the elite and privileged - however, one opposing voice in the video argues that the white student population he refers to don't have these kinds of privileges. The rebuttal is that blacks are wildly underrepresented in the hiring of professors, and that given equal education, blacks still earn significantly less. Critics say that affirmative action only exacerbates racial issues in a country where they aren't supposed to exist in the first place, while on the other hand supporters say that it is the only way for black people to access education in proportion to their representation in the overall population and achieve true social equality.

20. *What did you learn about the genetic makeup of the people Gates spoke to during the film? How does that relate to what we discussed about phenotype vs. race?*
    One professor who looked white was actually part African and Indian, while the rapper who was exactly what I would phenotypically identify as black had significant European and Indian heritage as well! This was very surprising to me, as was the fact that "phenotypically black" professor was over 50% European as well. My own surprise is interesting to me, I think because living in America we are the products of a society that did not embrace cultural mixing to the extent of a country like Brazil, and when it did happen to some extent, it was much later in our history. As a result, it feels like the phenotypical lines are very contrasted in the US - this is in stark opposition to the imagery of the population of Brazil in the video, in which there were many people that carried a wide variety of mixed phenotypes that I would probably not as readily identify one way or the other. Coupled with the fact that even a naive guess at the origin of the ancestry of the people mentioned above would have been completely off-base, an interesting takeaway from this is that I think humans are generally extremely bad at actually identifying things like race, and predominantly rely on these phenotypical features to differentiate people. What's interesting to me about this how many issues seem to be centered around "race", when we as humans seem to have no real reliable way to actually detect someone's race at all (apart from the sort of scientific DNA test carried out in the video, which is obviously a rare kind of procedure to carry out.) So it really seems like it's possible that many issues surrounding things like race, eugenics, bloodlines, etc are actually all artifacts of purely visual perceptions, and the worldwide and long-running historical patterns of discriminating based on visual characteristics under the guise of race is even more of a bizarre phenomenon than I initially thought.