# Journal 3, Zack Garza

## “The Unknown History of Latino Lynching”

1. *What reasons were Mexican-Americans lynched for, following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo?*

   Reasons mentioned in the article include:

   - "Acting uppity"
   - Taking jobs away from "Anglos" (i.e. white people)
   - Making advances towards Anglo women
   - Cheating at cards
   - Practicing Witchcraft
   - Refusing to leave land that Anglos wanted
   - Acting "too Mexican"
   - Speaking Spanish too loudly
   - Showcasing their culture too openly
   - (for Mexican-American Women) Resisting sexual advances by Anglo men

   It is probably fair to assume that this is only a small subset of the reasons they were actually lynched, since these are just what was salvaged from Mexican-American historical records. As the article mentions, most of the other records preserved from that era would have been written and kept by the Anglo population, and there would have been tendencies for the dominant "colonialists" to blot out many of the other reasons that would have been embarrassing in retrospect. I would guess that that anything contrary to the social dynamic could have been used as a reason to be lynched. For example, in the Southern US, even after slavery and Jim Crow, for many years blacks were still punished for essentially petty social issues such as not moving off of the sidewalk into the street to let white people walk by. Things like this persisted until (and even beyond) the era of Rosa Parks, with whom the "back of the bus" incident was representative of an entire class of similar social conventions that were disproportionately punished when they were violated. That being said, I would imagine that many of the Mexican-Americans in this era faced punishments for similar transgressions - acting like equal citizens, standing up for their own rights and dignity, making efforts to get ahead in life, and more.

2. *Why is it problematic to lynch people for the reasons listed the answers from Question1?*

   Aside from the questionable motives behind these specific reasons and the fact that they are all minor social qualms as opposed to punishable offenses, all of the items mentioned above are extremely subjective. Very few of them are things that could be proved in court, even if they had tried - the only way most of them could be reported in the first place would be from the accusation of a white person. Even if these were grievous offences, any such case would essentially have to boil down to eyewitness accounts and personal testimonies - and in a time when there was such a cultural schism, these accounts could be twisted or tainted by racist undertones, or even result in downright lies. 

   As a concrete example, consider a fictional example where one particular Mexican-American is an exceptionally good card player, and makes a living by winning poker games at a local bar or saloon. Imagine if they had won many times against white Anglo players - then all it would take is for one sore lose to accuse this person of cheating to get law enforcement involved. It wouldn't be a stretch to imagine that other frequenters of the location who had lost money in card games against this person would readily testify against them - be it for racial reasons, or as a way to recoup their losses, or even just as a petty form of revenge. With a number of white people (who wielded more social influence and power) testifying against this person, it would almost surely be the case that the Mexican-American would be lynched as a result. This is despite the fact that there may be no proof that "cheating" of any kind occurred, or even that if it had occurred, that the punishment vastly outweighs the severity of such a crime.

   Hopefully this example highlights the general pattern - kicking the "law" into motion could be done on subjective grounds, with no real proof, and then "justice" was enacted by something resembling a mob mentality, where the enforcers were all in positions of wanting to see the accused person sentenced for various social and racial reasons unrelated to any particular transgression. It could also be the case that the punishments circumvent the law entirely, carried out by vigilantes while the official enforcement looks the other way. This yields a completely corrupted justice system.

3. *Why might Latino women have been lynched?*

   One of the reasons mentioned in the article specifically revolved around Latino women rejecting sexual advances from Anglo men. As was also the case in the era of black slavery, chances are high that Anglo men of the era felt "entitled" to these advances on women - in the previous era, this may have been tied to notions of the woman being a form of property, but there is surely also an element of domination and subjugation involved in both cases. After all, according to novels and writings from this era, this kind of entitlement was not seen in the interactions between white men and white women. There was presumably some form of social decorum, and despite the fact that women were still immensely unequal in numerous other areas, this kind of dynamic did not exist between white men and women - or at least, if it did, it was confined to (for example) married couples, and not expressed between complete strangers. On the other hand, when it came to black or latino women, a completely different social dynamic came into play that seems to have it somehow acceptable for a white man to approach or demand sexual activities from these women, and there was enough racial momentum at the time to support the idea that denying this was an affront and even a crime. This also relates to issues we discussed previously, such as the one-drop rule, whereby seeing anyone with mixed blood as less than human made it possible for sexual violence against women to be normalized. In these cases, the entitlement and (and associated punishment for denial) could have been tied to this - surely there was very little of things like birth control, so while sexual advances on a white woman resulting in impregnation would kick in societal norms of taking care of children, these norms would not apply at all when the baby was mixed-race. This would have the effect of reducing the consequences of such actions, and only serve to normalize this kind of behavior and desensitize people to these acts.

4. *How is new information about this topic being made available to American contemporary audiences?*

   The article mentions that much of this information was confined to things like Spanish papers, which were simply never wholeheartedly investigated or reviewed by scholars and historians, partially due to the fact that many of them did not know or want to learn Spanish, partially due to disinterest, and perhaps even partially due to the fact that they were predominantly of Anglo heritage and knew that unearthing these happenings would expose an embarrassing history. The article also mentions that even when accounts were discovered, they were ignored or misinterpreted, despite the fact that these lynching incidents were common knowledge in Latino culture, as evidenced by their references in songs and rhymes that were passed down. However, this meant that within the Latino world, memory of these incidents was preserved in an oral fashion, which would require deeper digging and analysis to really understand than something explicitly written. The article also mentions the colonial tendency of trying to cast these kinds of events in a favorable light after the fact, painting them as acts of salvation and civilization.


## Many Rivers to Cross: Episode 4 “Making a Way out of No Way”

5. *How had the Emancipation Proclamation not lived up to its name?*

   Despite being emancipated in a technical sense, which made the outright ownership of slaves as in the pre-war days illegal, it did not serve to give black people many of the other important aspects of freedom, such as the means of pursuing their hopes and dreams freely. Society was still segregated, both socially and legally, and this served to keep black people in a "lesser" position and stifle their ability to grow and actually attain the same freedoms that other white citizens were able to. Additionally, there were Jim Crow laws, which essentially legally codified and allowed many of the same types of abuses that happened during slavery to persist well afterwards.

6. *Why did some advocate for African-Americans to stay in the South?*

   Some, such as Booker T. Washington, believe that black people should stay in the South because he believed that the South leaving behind its antebellum ways relied crucially on both white and black people working together - this was especially critical, because black people formed a large percentage of the Southern population, and had indeed been instrumental in building the prosperity that it had. He also believed that black people staying in the South was an important way for them to gain economic strength and prosperity, which would be a key factor in them winning true equality, and that eventually white people would come to see the immense value that black workers provided.

7. *What things were created to counteract the gains made by Blacks in the South?*

   The video primarily highlights the caricatures of black people, which would show up in things like comics and post cards. These shaped the attitudes towards black people, which had changed from relatively positive characterizations during the slave days (hard working, trustworthy, safe to have them watch children) into something demonized. For people that hadn't personally met many black people, this may have shaped their perceptions entirely, and also served to shape the views of new generations. Of course, the Jim Crow laws also served the purpose of counteracting many of the gains made, as did the lynchings and acts such as destroying black businesses that were succeeding. A prime example of this is the burning of the black portion of town in Tulsa.

8. *How did these negative caricatures shape the view of Blacks after Reconstruction? How did that differ from how they were seen during slavery?*

   Beforehand, although black people were still treated as slaves and property, there was some level of trustworthiness and some positive attributes associated to them. They were seen as hard workers, reliable, faithful, malleable, and white people even trusted them around their children and property. As the clip from "Birth of Nation" shows, though, their depictions changed to predatory, almost animal-like, as something freed upon the nation and descending like a plague of locusts. Perhaps an interesting consequence of this is the fact that after a certain amount of time, there were generations of people that had never experienced the perceptions of black people as seen during the slave era. And as we see even in modern times, it is often the case that children can scarcely see differences along racial lines without external environmental influences. However, it was these types of images and depictions, as well the attitudes of parents and peers, that instilled this same racial distinction in an entirely new generation, at which point it should have almost become an artifact of a different time.

9. *France 1900; describe the way Blacks in America were depicted at the photo exhibit*

   They were depicted as caricatures - often with large lips, bigger heads, and were generally sized much larger relative to other things they were near. They were depicted as savages, "Jezebels", one image shows a baby drinking black ink instead of white milk. There are depictions of interactions between black people, who are still often dressed in tattered clothes, with weird sexual overtones in some cases. There are stereotypes of black people eating watermelons, having dogs chew at their clothes, and often have literally no other facial features than the out-of-proportion lips, noses, and eyes. There is also in image of children that depicts them like a litter of animals, and even images of blacks being punished and tortured in a public and almost matter-of-fact kind of way - for example, there is one image where this is happening and a black child looks onward in horror while a crowd of white people watch it like an everyday occurrence. However, at the world's fair, the "American Nego Exhibit" showed images of dignified, well-dressed, modern-looking African-Americans. They were shown pursuing arts, holding musical instruments, wearing fashionable and "rich" clothing - a complete and polar opposite of the postcard depictions.

## Kipling’s “White Man’s Burden”

10. *Describe what the “Burden” is?*

  Each verse addresses a different burden, so I will just go by them one-by-one. In the first verse, he describes a burden to go and capture people to serve as slaves, describing the captives as half-devil children. Presumably the burden here is not only the act of sending their own people to foreign countries to capture these slaves, but also be near and among these "lesser" people.

  The second verse talks about the burdens of patience, putting up with the slaves' desires to be and be treated as human beings, as well to keep the slaves in line (so to speak). Part of the burden here seems to be to remain calm, using "open speech and simple", with the promise of profit and gain (even if it is someone else's)

  The third verse talks about the burden of waging wars of peace, by which I think he refers to the fact that he thinks the ends are justified (peace) while the means may be less than desirable (war). So it would seem that the burden is slogging through this war, through famine and sickness, and to keep their eye on the goal, without letting themselves slip into vices and laziness in the meantime.

  The fourth verse talks about the burden of making one's own way, I think - that the cost of not being ruled by kings is that they must create their own means through the use of labor. 

  The fifth verse talks of taking up the burden of having a certain position in life that comes with any endeavor towards freedom - coming to hate those better-off than you, and to blame lower classes.

  The sixth verse talks about the burden of not using "freedom" too often or too much as an excuse, lest those slaves they captured begin to also begin to believe in those ideas for themselves, and judge the captors for not equally applying their ideals to all people.

  The last verse talks about the burden of thanklessness, a stark difference from the easy praise that comes with youth, and to instead embrace the search for meaning in adulthood, which although thankless, yields the reward of wisdom.

11. *How is the “other” described, what images are you given of them*

    They are described as the new-caught people, sullen, and half-devil, half-child. Throughout the poem, they are depicted as a group of people that must be saved, and there is an implicit view that they actually are somehow sub-human and that white people have to simply put up with their attempts to express their humanity. It also depicts their primary purpose as things to be put to work, essentially for free labor to build the profits that other white people want, and that it is somehow noble for all parties involved. It is reminiscent of the logic used in, say, the Crusades, where atrocious acts of ongoing war were accepted and rationalized by rhetoric that said the participants were only holy missions to "save" savage countries and bring religion, civilization, and scientific advancement to them. Later in the poem, it even acknowledges the fact that the slaves may cry out, and instructs the reader to "humor" them, further affirming this almost subhuman depiction.

12. *What does it mean to get the “blame of those ye better, the hate of those ye guard”*

    I interpret this verse to be saying something about an ongoing class or caste system, and that the associated burden is simply ideologically buying into this system, for better or worse, because it's what has been around and has worked for them in the past. In that light, I think this almost describes the burden of the white man is to not only ensure their slaves are placed into this system, but for they themselves to take their place within this system as well. The phrase describes a sort of hierarchy, where no one really seems to enjoy their position, and as a result they resent those who are doing better, and place the blame for their problems on those in a lower station of life. This is something that certainly happens today, to some extent - people hate corporations, millionaires, and rich people who spend exorbitantly and extravagantly, but then turn around and place the blame on "welfare queens", or homeless people, or even the middle class. So I think this verse speaks to a certain kind of class warfare that seems to have existed for quite some time, certain parts of which have never changed.

13. *What might the colonized rename this poem, from their point of view?* *Why?*

    This depends - if this was interpreted in a context of satire, as it might be with modern sensibilities, the name is almost appropriate as is - just put quotes around the word "burden" everywhere and you have a scathing critique of what was happening. From the point of view of those being subjugated, they might replace "burden" with something like "modus operandi", or name it something like "The Way of the White Man". It would only be seen as a real burden to anyone agreeing with the author, which would only have sensibly been free white people in the position to enslave or subjugate others. Anyone other cultures, especially those on the receiving end of such subjugation, would perhaps recognize it as just another iteration in the pattern of things white people had been doing for hundreds of years via colonialism.


##“Confusing Occupation with Liberation”Mark Twain’s response to imperialism abroad

14. *Filipino casualties versus American casualties*

    The first thing to note is the vast difference in the numbers - while only 5000 American soldiers died, the estimated number of Filipino casualties was on the order of 250,000 - over 50 times as many. The second thing to note is the cause of death, while 8% were killed in combat, it's estimated that the remaining 92% died of things like starvation and disease, due to the fact that the US Army attacked civilian structures and institutions, decimating their crops and homes instead of just military targets. Additionally, even after the war, there was an occupation of American forces which continued to result in casualties for many years.

15. *Why would the U.S. want to rule the Philippines?* *How does it connect to today?*

    There are many reasons - one would be to establish a military presence in the area, which would allow the US to compete or even advance on Asian countries (as it indeed did, into Vietnam in the 19602). Such a presence can serve many purpose - as a launch into colonial takeovers, as a strategic military location, to increase overall negotiating and trade power in regions, or as a way to gain new land and new populations to subjugate. There could also be financial reasons, say if the country has significant natural resources, or lies in a critical portion of a trade route, then control of these areas leads to the ability to impose taxes, tarifs, and fees, and also to just take certain resources outright. This is of course intimately linked to many of today's efforts, where it is commonly suggested that America's presence in the Middle East is primarily for economic reasons, particularly to have more power and control over oil reserves. The article also mentions other parallels, such as how the war in the Philippines served as a model for how war was to be waged in the 20th century and into the 21st, and how Bush's quaint retrospective of that war may be similar to how future leaders refer to current brutal wars.


## Foner, p. 476-494, 525-541

16. *Symbolism behind cowboys, and importance of the cattle drives*

    Came into existence partially due to economic reasons, as the Union armies exhausted food supplies (e.g. beef) and the East became more urbanized. Moving things North was economically advantageous - one steer was worth ten times as much in the North as it was in Texas. At least 1/4 of the cattle drivers were black, the symbolism behind them was that of heroes braving the elements and nature. Their fashion and style also became emblematic and coveted, despite being mostly for practical purposes originally, and it carried mixes of Spanish and Mexican influences. They became glorified in literature and novels, which certainly helped to improve the depictions and imagery associated with the slighted minorities in other areas. This was important as it helped slightly counteract some of the damage done by these depictions, possibly even providing role models for black or mexican people in new areas. This era was brought to an end by overgrazing and bad weather, but the imagery and depictions lived on in the cultural zeitgeist.

17. *Brigham Young*

    Mormons moved to Salk Lake area around the 1840s, lead by Brigham Young who eventually became the governor of one of the newly established territories. He clashed with federal judges, and was eventually replaced as governor with someone who had no affiliation with their church - however, he refused to allow this replacement to happen, which led to federal troops being sent in to occupy territory in Utah. This led to a continued conflict between Mormons and other settlers, which included armed attacks of settlers and people passing through the territory. The Mormons saw the cowboy imagery and depictions as deplorable and immoral. As time went on, they tried to ease their relations with the federal government, eventually banning their practice of polygamy. This eventually resulted in Utah being included as a new state, with the ban codified into law. This ended the major conflicts, however smaller conflicts between isolated groups and the native americans continued.

18. *Chinese Exclusion* 

    Part of a movement to ban "undesirable" voters from participating in elections. Most immigrants were unattached men, brought in as laborers to work as gold miners, construction workers, and factory workers, this later expanded to include the immigration of entire families. At one point, around 1880, Congress banned Chinese immigrants outright, and this was made permanent around 1900. The immigrant population was mostly on the West coast, and were expelled from towns, excluded from public education, and the courts eventually passed laws that allowed deportation without due process of law at all. At least one person warned that using this power may have been aligned with the prevalent social opinions of the majority at that moment, but very easily set a precedent for many other demarcations that would allow power to be wielded against arbitrary groups. This was realized when there was a ruling banning anarchists from immigrating. What's perhaps interesting about this is that we're talking about the turn of the 19th century - not long after slavery, but also not that long ago. While Jim Crowe laws were something that formally went into place in a local way, these immigration restrictions were enacted and outwardly supported on a national level. This doesn't downplay the significance of Jim Crow, but rather serves to highlight just how comfortable people had become with these discriminatory practices that they could make it into national laws and rulings.

19. *Open Door policy*

    Went into effect after the Spanish-American War, with the announced purpose of allowing equal access to American exports to various Chinese markets that had been carved up by recent European activities. This did not apply as much to people, as it did to economies and markets, and the free flow of goods and trade. This highlights a certain level of contradiction in the governmental policy at the time - as the text states, the US was perfectly content to ban Chinese immigration, while simultaneously demanding that China allow the US access to its markets and opportunities. This is powerful example, because it also highlights how the US continues to operate to this day. While the methods may be different, in that outright bans on immigrant are infrequent, the US wields its economic power to much of the same effect. In many cases, the US will place trade sanctions on other nations, while simultaneously demanding free one-way access to those very markets they are restricting outward access to.