# Lecture 1

Goals:

- Describe Hochschild and cyclic homology using a classical approach
- Describe the "Topological" counterparts
- Relate these to Algebraic and Arithmetic Geometry

## Classical Theory

This only depends on basic homological algebra, but becomes a bit more interesting when objects with a "perfectoid" flavor are input.

:::{.definition title="Hochschild Complex and Homology"}
Fix a commutative ring $k$, then for any $k\dash$ algebra $A$ we can form the **Hochschild complex**
\[
\HH(A_{/k}) &\definedas A \xleftarrow{\del_1} A^{\tensor_k 2} \xleftarrow{\del_2} A^{\tensor_k 3}\to \cdots \\  
~ \\
\del_1(a_0 \tensor a_1)~ &= a_0a_1 - a_1a_0 \\
\del_2(a_0\tensor a_1\tensor a_2) &= a_0a_1 \tensor a_2 -a_0a_1\tensor a_2 + a_2a_0\tensor a_1 \\
& \vdots
\]
The Hochschild homology groups $\HH_n(A_{/k})$ are defined by taking the homology of this complex.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
\[
\HH_0(A_{/k}) &= { A \over \generators{ab-ba} } = {A \over [A, A]}  = A && \text{if $A$ is commutative} \\
\HH_1(A_{/k})  &= { A\tensor_k A \over  \generators{ab\tensor c - a\tensor bc + ac\tensor b} } = \Omega^1_{A_{/k}} \\
\\
\vdots &
\\
\HH_*(A_{/k}) &\text{ in general is a commutative graded $k\dash$algebra}
.\]

Note that the ideal appearing in the second example is the Leibniz rule from differential forms, and so the last object is the module of **Kahler differential forms** via the identification $adb \mapsto a\tensor b$
:::



:::{.theorem title="Hochschild-Kostent-Rosenburg, 60s"}
Using these facts, we get maps 
$$
\varepsilon_n: \Omega^n_{A_{/k}} \to \HH_n
$$
by the universal property of the differential forms 
$$
\Omega^*_{A_{/k}} \definedas \Lambda_A^* \Omega^1_{A_{/k}}
$$
Then the theorem is that if $A$ is smooth over $k$, then $\varepsilon_n$ are all isomorphisms.
:::

So the philosophy here is that $\HH_*$ works as a generalization of differential forms, even if $A$ is not smooth or even not commutative (Connes, Feigen-Tsygen, Loday-Quillen).

## Toward Proving HKR: A Lemma

:::{.remark}
We use $(\wait \hat\tensor \wait)$ to denote the *derived tensor product.*
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let $E = A\tensor_k A^\text{op}$ be the enveloping algebra of $A$, then for any flat $k\dash$ algebra $A$, up to quasi-isomorphism we have 
$$
\HH(A_{/k}) \homotopic A\hat\tensor_E A.
$$
:::

:::{.remark}
This works because $E$ is an $A$ bimodule, and so the derived tensor product appearing on the RHS is represented by the Hochschild complex on the left.
Note that we can do this for non-flat $A$ by replacing the tensor product appearing in $E$ with a derived tensor product, which puts you in the world of simplicial rings.
:::

:::{.proof title="of lemma"}
To prove this lemma, we explicitly calculate the RHS as 
$$
A\hat\tensor_E A = A\hat\tensor_E \left[ A^{\tensor 2} \xleftarrow{\del'_3}  A^{\tensor 3} \xleftarrow{\del'_4} \cdots \right]
$$

where the complex appearing on the RHS is the bar complex, i.e. a resolution of $A$ by flat $E\dash$modules. This is essentially the Hochschild complex, truncating the first term, with a different differential $\del'$ given by 
$$
\del'_n(a_1 \tensor a_2 \tensor \cdots a_n) = \sum_{i=1}^n (-1)^{i+1} a_i \tensor \qty{ \prod_{j\neq i}a_j} 
$$

> (DZG) This may not be quite correct, just a guess, I think I was filling in some missing details.

Because $A$ is a unital algebra, this complex is exact (except at degree zero), which is a purely algebraic result. 
It also resolves $A$. This can be seen because if you use the multiplication map $m: A\tensor A \to A$ and then $\ker m = \im \del'_3$. Under the flatness assumption, all of the terms in this resolution are flat $A\dash$modules. 
Finally, when you base change along $E$ down to $A$, this introduces the "cyclic" part of the multiplication defined in $\HH$ earlier, and so this is an on-the-nose identification where the RHS is computing the derived tensor product. 
This is because in $E$, $A$ acts on the left and $A^\text{op}$ acts on the right, and so taking $A\hat\tensor_E$ mods out by the multiplication and thus identifies these two actions and introduces the cyclic part of the boundary maps in $\HH$.

From this we obtain the corollary
$$
H_*(A_{/k}) = \tor_*^E(A,A).
$$

:::


## Proving HKR

Again take $A$ a smooth $k\dash$algebra, we need to show that the graded algebra $\HH_*(A_{/k})$ is the exterior algebra on its degree 1 element.
This is well-known for the graded algebra $\tor_*^B(C, C)$ when $\ker(B \surjects C)$ is locally generated by a regular sequence. In this case, there is an explicit Koszul complex from which you can read off the fact that these tor groups are just the wedge algebra generated by $\tor_1^B$. 

An example of this is the multiplication map $A \tensor_k A \to A$, since $k\to A$ is smooth. This works because locally (after localizing and perhaps some etale extension), this looks like a polynomial algebra and this map looks like $k[t] \tensor_k k[t] \to k[t]$, which has kernel $\generators{t\tensor 1 - 1\tensor t}$, which is a regular sequence. This exactly applies to the corollary above, so we're done.

> Note: something interesting happens here, because we usually look at differential forms arising from the de Rham cochain complex, while here's we've written down a chain complex whose homology gives the terms in this cochain complex. This is what makes $\HH$ an enrichment of the de Rham complex.

### Cyclic Homology

We have group actions on the Hochschild complex:
\[
\HH(A_{/k}) \definedas &A  \xleftarrow{\del_1} &&A^{\tensor_k 2} \xleftarrow{\del_2} &&A^{\tensor_k 3} \xleftarrow{} \cdots \\
&\ZZ/1\ZZ \actson &&\ZZ/2\ZZ \actson &&\ZZ/3\ZZ \actson 
\]

In general, we have 
$$
\generators{t_n} \definedas \ZZ/(n+1)\ZZ \actson A^{\tensor_k (n+1)}.
$$ 

Note that the label on the generator here is slightly weird, but the reason is that $\ZZ/n\ZZ$ is actually acting on terms of homological degree $n-1$. This action is given by a "cyclic right shift",
$$
t_n: A^{\tensor_k(n+1)} &\to A^{\tensor_k (n+1) } \\
a_0 \tensor \cdots \tensor a_{n-1} \tensor a_n 
&\mapsto 
a_{n} \tensor a_0 \tensor \cdots \tensor a_{n-1}
$$

We then define a norm
\[
\mathrm{N}&: A^{\tensor_k (n+1)} \selfmap \\
\mathrm{N}& \definedas \sum_{i=1}^n \left((-1)^n t_n\right)^i
\]

where we think of $(-1)^nt_n$ as a "twisted action", and an "extra degeneracy" map
\[
s: A^{\tensor_k n} &\to A^{\tensor_k (n+1)} \\
\bigotimes_i a_i &\mapsto 1\tensor\bigotimes_i a_i.
\]

These come about because the Hochschild complex is actually the complex associated to some simplicial $k\dash$module, which has face maps (going down) and degeneracy maps (going up). The boundary maps are the alternating sums of the face maps here, and the degeneracy maps just involve inserting a 1 somewhere in the tensor product -- except this particular map doesn't appear, which is why it's an "extra" degeneracy.

:::{.definition title="Connes Operator and Algebraic $S^1$ Complexes"}
Perhaps the most important map is **Connes operator**,
\[
B: A^{\tensor_k n} \mapsvia{N} A^{\tensor_k n} \mapsvia{s} A^{\tensor_k (n+1)}
\mapsvia{\id - (-1)^nt_n} A^{\tensor_k (n+1)}
\]
One can check that $B^2=0$ and $B\del + \del B = 0$ for $\del$ the boundary map in the Hochschild complex $\HH$. 
Thus $B$ gives $\HH$ the structure of a cochain complex, in addition to it being a chain complex, which are both compatible. 
This is called a **mixed complex** or an **algebraic $S^1\dash$complex**.
:::

:::{.remark}
We can also think of $B:H(A_{/k}) \to \HH(A_{/k})[-1]$, and $B$ can be said to "refine the de Rham differential", characterized by the commutativity of the following diagram:

\begin{tikzcd}
	{\HH_n(A_{/k})} && {\HH_{n+1}(A_{/k})} \\
	\\
	{\Omega^n_{A_{/k}}} && {\Omega^{n+1}_{A_{/k}}}
	\arrow["{\eps_{n+1}}", from=3-3, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\eps_n}", from=3-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow["{\bd_{dR}}"{description}, from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["B"{description}, from=1-1, to=1-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXEhIX24oQV97L2t9KSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcSEhfe24rMX0oQV97L2t9KSJdLFswLDIsIlxcT21lZ2Febl97QV97L2t9fSJdLFsyLDIsIlxcT21lZ2Fee24rMX1fe0Ffey9rfX0iXSxbMywxLCJcXGVwc197bisxfSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcZXBzX24iXSxbMiwzLCJcXGJkX3tkUn0iLDFdLFswLDEsIkIiLDFdXQ==)

:::

:::{.slogan}
$\HH$ is a "lift" of the entire structure of the de Rham complex. 
We can now proceed as if we were constructing de Rham cohomology, but we'll do it with $\HH$ instead.
:::

### Definitions of Cyclic Homology (and its variants)

First, we'll assemble a bunch of copies of $\HH$ into a double complex, rewriting $\del$ as $b$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\ddots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots & \udots & \udots \\
	\ddots & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,214;green,153;blue,92}{A^{\tensor_k 4}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,92;green,214;blue,214}{A^{\tensor_k 3}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}{A^{\tensor_k 2}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,153;green,92;blue,214}{A} & \udots \\
	\cdots & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,92;green,214;blue,214}{A^{\tensor_k 3}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}{A^{\tensor_k 2}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,153;green,92;blue,214}{A} & \bullet & \cdots \\
	\cdots & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}{A^{\tensor_k 2}} & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,153;green,92;blue,214}{A} & \bullet & \bullet & \cdots \\
	\udots & \textcolor{rgb,255:red,153;green,92;blue,214}{A} & \bullet & \bullet & \bullet & \ddots \\
	\udots & \udots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \ddots
	\arrow["B"', from=2-5, to=2-4]
	\arrow["B"', from=2-4, to=2-3]
	\arrow["B"', from=2-3, to=2-2]
	\arrow["B"', from=3-3, to=3-2]
	\arrow["B"', from=4-3, to=4-2]
	\arrow["B"', from=3-4, to=3-3]
	\arrow["b", from=2-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow["b", from=3-2, to=4-2]
	\arrow["b", from=4-2, to=5-2]
	\arrow["b", from=2-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["b", from=3-3, to=4-3]
	\arrow["b", from=2-4, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}


> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)


Here the condition $Bd = -dB$ from earlier makes this anti-commute. 
Note that this extends to infinity in both homological and cohomological degree, so this complex is supported in quadrants 1,2 and 3.

:::{.definition title="Periodic Cyclic Homology"}
The **periodic cyclic homology** $\HP(A_{/k})$ is given by the totalization of this complex, obtained by taking the *direct product* along diagonals. 
The **classical cyclic homology** $\HC(A_{/k})$ is obtained by taking the totalization of just the 1st quadrant, where the origin is taken wherever the bidegree is set to $(0,0)$ (i.e. take the $x\geq 0$ part). 
Finally, we can totalize what's left to define the **negative cyclic homology** $\HC^-(A_{/k})$, given by the totalization of the 2nd and 3rd quadrants (i.e. take the $x\leq 0$ part).
:::

:::{.remark}
Since this complex has infinite support, we have to distinguish between taking the direct sum and product here. There is also a differential graded algebra structure here which we won't address for now.
Note that $\HP$ and $\HC^-$ will have degrees extending in both directions, while $\HC$ sits in positive degree only.
:::

We can read off some structural properties. Consider the map given by shifting the entire complex one column to the left (thus excluding one column from positive part):
$$
\mathrm{Sh}: \HP \to \HP[2]
$$ 

> Note: $\mathrm{Sh}$ is referred to as a "periodicity map". The original lectures use $S$ to denote this map.

Considering the $\HC$ part, we obtain another copy of $\HC$, shifted by bidegree $(1,1)$, while what we lost was a column -- i.e. a copy of $\HH$. So there as an exact sequence of complexes
$$
0 \to \HH \to \HC \mapsvia{\Sh}  \HC[-2] \to 0
$$

Considering the $\HC^-$ part, an exactly analogous dual thing happens -- this one is easier to think of as restricting $\HC^-$ to a single column. What you obtain is a column (of course) corresponding to $\HH$, which kills a copy of $\HC^-$ shifted by bidegree $(1,1)$. So this yields another exact sequence
$$
0 \to \HC^-[-2] \mapsvia{\Sh} \HC^- \to \HH \to
$$

:::{.definition title="Norm Sequence"}
The most important sequence here is the **norm sequence**
$$
0 \to \HC^- \to \HP \to \HC[2] \to 0
$$
which states an obvious fact: the totalization of the entire complex sits between the totalizations of the left and right pieces respectively.
:::

:::{.remark}
We can alternatively obtain $\HP$ in the following way:
$$
\HP = \varprojlim(\cdots \HC[-4] \mapsvia{\Sh} \HC[-2] \mapsvia{\Sh} \HC )
$$

which says that we can totalize the entire complex by first chopping a column off and totalizing, then chopping off a second column to the left and totalizing, and so on taking the inverse limit. 

> Note that for this formula to hold, we had to take direct products instead of direct sums when totalizing.

Looking back at the periodicity maps, we find that this induces 2-periodicity in homology, and so
$$
\HP_n(A_{/k}) \cong \HP_{n+2}(A_{/k})
$$

:::

:::{.slogan}
Coarse information about $\HH$ yields coarse information about all of $\HP, \HC, \HC^-$.
:::


### Example Usage

Suppose $\HH_\text{odd}(A_{/k}) = 0$, which happens when $A$ is "perfectoid" in flavor.
Then $\HP_0(A_{/k})$ is a complete filtered ring which encodes some useful data.

> Note: The graded direct sum $\HP_*$ is actually a graded algebra, so we know that $\HP_0$ will be some ring/$k\dash$algebra.

It is filtered by ideals given by 
$$
F^i  \HP_0 (A_{/k}) \definedas \Sh^n(\HC^-_{2i}(A_{/k}))
$$
for some $n\geq 0$, where
$$
\frac{\HP_0(A_{/k})} {F^i(\HP_0(A_{/k}))} \cong \HC_{2i-2}(A_{/k})
$$
and the graded pieces are given by
$$
G^i \cong \HH_{2i}(A_{/k}).
$$

This essentially falls out of looking at the spectral sequence for $\HP$, where page $E_2$ will only contain elements sitting in even degree, and so this will be true for $\HP, \HC, \HC^-$.
We could also find this by looking at the short exact sequences from earlier, writing the associated long exact sequence, and chasing it backwards noting that $\HC$ is only supported in odd degrees.

> DZG: Lecture said supported in odd degrees, but maybe even..? Possibly not, due to shift, I don't know.

Then the map from $\HC^-$ to $\HP$ theories is in fact injective -- we can just apply these periodicity map a number of times and land in some ideal in $\HP_0$, and the quotient by this ideal will be some copy of the cyclic homology $\HC$. 
The graded pieces will be the difference between two cyclic homologies, which is exactly Hochschild homology.

:::{.slogan}
$\HP_0$ contains a great deal of data about $\HP, \HC, \HC^-$ as long as we equip it with this filtration and keep track of it.
:::

:::{.remark}
Later, we'll feed in perfectoid-ish things, and the result will be some filtered ring which encodes a lot of data about $\HH$. 
This resulting ring may be identifiable or something completely new!
:::

:::{.remark}
We can take $A = k[G]$, the group algebra of a group, to recover group homology (provided $G$ is abelian perhaps). In this case, the map $B$ is homotopically trivial, and so $\HP$ decomposes into a product of the group homologies -- then the periodicity map just shifts these in a periodic way. (?)
:::

