# Research Meeting Notes, January 17



We began this session with me going over a bit of what I'd read the past week (mostly Postnikov tower and rational homotopy), and started with a question about some of the most trivial examples of spectral sequences. The reply was that the long exact sequence is probably the best example, but I still need to do a bit of work to see how the LES sits inside a SS (and also how Mayer Vietoris does).

I also mentioned a bit about what I'd read about sheaf and de-Rham cohomology, and we dove into the background of that a bit. We talked about the existence of smooth bump functions - functions that are identically zero outside of a compact interval. This is surprising! Consider things like $e^{-x^2/2}$, these are almost-but-not-quite zero away from zero. But you can define something like $e^{-1/x^2}\cdot\mathbb{1}[x > 0]$; this is actually smooth at zero but *decidedly* not analytic - it's not equal to its Taylor polynomial at zero (indeed, it is identically zero). 

This highlights some of the differences that pop up in sheaf theory - we think of analytic objects as "rigid" and geometric, while smooth objects are somehow more "flexible". This is seen in analysis over $\CC^1$, where local knowledge of an analytic function determines its global behavior, but even over $\RR^1$ we find that there are many ways to continuously (and even smoothly) continue a function (e.g. extend by a polynomial of any degree in a piecewise fashion).

We then segued into some intersection theory, especially over projective spaces. Some important ideas here were that in flexible situations, weird singular behaviors can be avoided. For example, intersections between curves with multiplicity $\RR^n$ can be perturbed slightly so that they either intersect with the "right" multiplicity, or not at all. For example, conic sections in $\RR^2$ can be perturbed to intersect either twice or zero times. Over the complex numbers (since it is algebraically closed and curves are polynomials), the slight perturbation of (say) a quadratic will always deform singular points into two separate intersections. However, the singularities of the curves may be interesting themselves, and we might want information about those - so perturbing in such a way would result in losing that information. This is why algebraic geometry requires a bit more machinery, since we want to preserve information about these difficult spots.

The right sort of setting to study this kind of thing is usually a projective space of some kind. For example, one can take $\CP^2$ and adjoin an $S^2$ at infinity; then everything intersects this sphere.