# Thursday, August 20

> References: <https://www.daniellitt.com/tale-cohomology>

Prerequisites:

- Homological Algebra
  - Abelian Categories
  - Derived Functors
  - Spectral Sequences (just exposure!)
- Sheaf theory and sheaf cohomology
- Schemes (Hartshorne II and III)

Outline/Goals:

- Basics of etale cohomology
  - Etale morphism
  - Grothendieck topologies
  - The etale topology
  - Etale cohomology and the basis theorems
  - Etale cohomology of curves
  - Comparison theorems to singular cohomology
  - Focused on the case where coefficients are a constructible sheaf.

- Prove the Weil Conjectures (more than one proof)
  - Proving the Riemann Hypothesis for varieties over finite fields

  > One of the greatest pieces of 20th century mathematics!

- Topics
  - Weil 2 (Strengthening of RH, used in practice)
  - Formality of algebraic varieties (topological features unique to varieties)
  - Other things (monodromy, refer to Katz' AWS notes)


What is Etale Cohomology?
Suppose $X/\CC$ is a quasiprojective variety: a finite type separated integral $\CC\dash$scheme.

If you take the complex points, it naturally has the structure of a complex analytic space $X(\CC)^{\text{an}}$: you can give it the Euclidean topology, which is much finer than the Zariski topology.

For a nice topological space, we can associate the singular cohomology $H^i(X(\CC)^{\text{an}}, \ZZ)$, which satisfies several nice properties:

- Finitely generated $\ZZ\dash$modules
- Extra Hodge structure when tensored up to $\CC$ (same as $\CC$ coefficients)
- Cycle classes (i.e. associate to a subvariety a class in cohomology)

Goal of etale cohomology: do something similar for much more general "nice" schemes.
Note that some of these properties are special to complex varieties

E.g. finitely generated: not true for a random topological space

We'll associate $X$ a "nice scheme" $\rightsquigarrow H^i(X_{\text{et}}, \ZZ/\ell^n\ZZ)$.
Take the inverse limit over all $n$ to obtain the $\ell\dash$adic cohomology $H^i(X_{\text{et}}, \ZZ_\ell)$.
You can tensor with $\QQ$ to get something with $\QQ_\ell$ coefficients.
And as in singular cohomology, you can a "twisted coefficient system".

What are nice schemes:

- $X = \spec \OO_k$, the ring of integers over a number field.
- $X$ a variety over an algebraically closed field
  - Typical, most analogous to taking a variety over $\CC$.
- $X$ a variety over a non-algebraically closed field
  
Some comparisons between the last two cases:

- For $\CC\dash$ variety, $H^i_{\text{sing}}$ will vanish above $i=2d$.
- Over a finite field, $H^i$ will vanish for $i>2d+1$ but generally not vanish for $i=2d+1$. 

In good situations, these are finitely generated $\ZZ/\ell^n\ZZ\dash$modules, have Mayer-Vietoris and excision sequences, spectral sequences, etc.

Related invariants: for a scheme with a geometric point $(X, \bar x) \rightsquigarrow \pi_1^{\text{étale}}(X, \bar x)$, which is a profinite topological group, which is a profinite topological group.

> Note: a geometric point is a map from $\spec X$ to an algebraically closed field.

More invariants beyond the scope of this course:

- Higher homotopy groups
- Homotopy type (equivalence class of spaces)

So we want homotopy-theoretic invariants for varieties.

:::{.remark}
This cohomology theory is necessarily weird!

:::{.theorem title="Serre"}
There does not exists a cohomology theory for schemes over $\bar{\FF}_q$ with the following properties:

1. Functorial
2. Satisfies the Kunneth formula
3. For $E$ an elliptic curve, $H^1(E) = \QQ^2$.

> Slogan: No cohomology theory with $\QQ$ coefficients. 

:::
:::{.proof}
Take $E$ to be a supersingular elliptic curve.
Then $\endo(E) \tensor \QQ$ is a quaternion algebra.

Fact: There are no algebra morphisms $R\to \mat_{2\times 2}(\QQ)$

:::{.exercise}
Functoriality and Kunneth implies that $\endo(E)\actson E$ yields an action on $H^1(E)$, which is precisely an algebra morphism $\endo(E) \to \mat_{2\by 2}(\QQ)$, a contradiction.

> The content: the sum of two endomorphisms act via their sum on $H^1$.
:::

:::{.exercise}
Prove the same thing for $\QQ_p$ coefficients, where $p$ divides the characteristic of the ground field.

> Proof the same, just need to know what quaternion algebras show up.
:::
:::
:::


This forces using some kind of 

