# Chapter 3

Three categories of maps:

- Submersions: everywhere surjective differentials (analogy: quotient maps)
- Immersions: everywhere injective differentials,
- Embeddings: injective immersions that are homeomorphisms onto their images.


Definition (Rank)
: If $F:M \to N$ is a smooth map of manifolds and $p\in M$, then the *rank of $F$ at $p$* is the rank of the linear map $dF_p: T_p M \to T_{F(p)} N$

This is equivalently the rank of the Jacobian of $F$ in any chart, or the dimension of $\im dF_p \subseteq T_{F(p)}N$.
The rank may vary from point to point.

$\rank(F)$ is bounded above by $\min \theset{\dim M, \dim N}$; if it achieves this maximum we say $F$ has full rank.


Definition (Submersion)
: A smooth map $F:M\to N$ is a *submersion* iff $dF_p$ is surjective for every $p\in M$, or equivalently $F$ has constant rank $\rank(F) = \dim N$.

  > Analogy: surjective linear maps.

Definition (Immersion)
: A smooth map $F:M\to N$ is an *immersion* iff $dF_p$ is injective for every $p\in M$, or equivalently $F$ is of constant rank $\rank(F) = \dim M$.

  > Analogy: injective linear maps.



Proposition
: If $F:M\to N$ and $dF_p$ is surjective (resp. injective) at a point, then there exists a neighborhood $U \ni p$ such that $F$ restricted to $U$ is a submersion (resp. immersion).

Proof
: Go to charts.
  The set of $m\times n$ matrices of full rank is open in $\mat(m\times n, \RR)$ and the Jacobian is a continuous function of its entries.


Examples
:   \hfill

    - Coordinate projections $\pi_i: \prod_{j=1}^n M_j \to M_i$ are smooth submersions.
    - $\gamma: I \to M$ a smooth surve is a smooth immersion $\iff \gamma'(t) \neq 0$ for all $t\in I$.
    - The projection $TM\to M$ is a smooth submersion. 

Exercise
: Show that smooth submersions are closed under composition, as are smooth immersions, but not maps of constant rank.

Definition (Local Diffeomorphism)
: A map $F:M\to N$ is a *local diffeomorphism* iff every $p\in M$ has a neighborhood $U\ni p$ such that $F(U) \subseteq N$ is open and $\restrictionof{F}{U}:U\to F(U)$ is a diffeomorphism.

Theorem (Inverse Function Theorem)
: If $p\in M$ and $dF_p$ is invertible, then there are connected neighborhoods $U\ni p$ and $V\ni F(p)$ such that $\restrictionof{F}{U}:U\to V$ is a diffeomorphism.

Theorem (Inverse Function Theorem, Rudin's Version)
: If $f$ is a $C^1$ mapping of open subsets $M\subseteq \RR^m\to \RR^n\supseteq N$ and $f'(p)$ is invertible for some $p\in M$, then there exists $U\ni p$ and $V\ni f(p)$ such that $\restrictionof{f}{U}:U\to V$ is a bijection with $C^1$ inverse.

Note that this can fail if $\bd M \neq \emptyset$, but will hold when $F(M)\subseteq N^\circ$.
This *always* happens at points $p$ where $dF_p$ is invertible.

Proposition
:   \hfill

    1. $F$ is a local diffeomorphism $\iff F$ is an immersion and a submersion.
    2. If $\dim M = \dim N$ and $F$ is *either* an immersion or a submersion, then $F$ is a local diffeomorphism.

Proof
:   \hfill

    1. Find a neighborhood $U\ni p$ on which $F: U \to F(U)$ is a diffeomorphism, then $dF_p: T_p M \mapsvia{\cong} T_{F(p)}N$ is an isomorphism, so $\rank(F) = \dim M = \dim N$ and $F$ is an immersion and a submersion.

      Conversely, if $dF_p$ is an isomorphism at each point, the inverse function theorem supplies neighborhoods on which $F$ is a diffeomorphism.

    2. If $\dim M = \dim N$ then either injectivity or surjectivity of $dF_p$ implies bijectivity.

Theorem (Rank Theorem)
:   If $F:M\to N$ with $\dim(M) = m,~\dim(N) = n$ and about each $p\in M$ there exist charts for which $F$ has a coordinate representation

  \begin{align*}
  \hat F(x^1, \cdots, x^r, x^{r+1}, \cdots, x^m) = (x^1, \cdots, x^r, 0, \cdots, 0) \\
  \hat F(x^1, \cdots, x^n, x^{n+1}, \cdots, x^m) = (x^1, \cdots, x^n) \quad\text{if $F$ is a submersion} \\
  \hat F(x^1, \cdots, x^n, x^{n+1}, \cdots, x^m) = (x^1, \cdots, x^m, 0, \cdots, 0) \quad\text{if $F$ is an immersion}\\
  .\end{align*}

  I.e., submersions are projections onto the first $n = \dim N$ coordinates, and immersions are inclusions of the first $m=\dim M$ coordinates.

Proposition
:   Suppose $F:M\to N$ and $M$ is connected, then TFAE:

    - $F$ has constant rank.
    - For each $p\in M$ there are charts such that $F$ is linear.

I.e. constant rank maps locally behave like their differentials.

Theorem (Global Rank Theorem)
:   Let $F:M \to N$ be smooth of constant rank, then

    1. $F$ surjective $\implies F$ is a submersion,
    2. $F$ injective $\implies F$ is a immersion,
    3. $F$ bijective $\implies F$ is a diffeomorphism.

One additional more general case: manifolds with boundary, where the domain includes a boundary point.
In this case, if $F:M\to N$ is an immersion with $p\in \bd M$ then there exist charts such that $F$ has a coordinate representation of inclusion of the first $m$ coordinates.
The situation is more complicated when the codomain includes boundary points, since the image may intersect $\bd N$ in unpredictable ways.


Definition (Embedding)
: A *smooth embedding* $F:M\to N$ is an immersion that is also a topological embedding, i.e. a homeomorphism onto its image.

> Note that this is not just a smooth topological embedding, it additionally must be an immersion.

Examples:

- Subset inclusions $U \injects M$.
- "Insertion of coordinate" maps $\iota_j: M_j \to \prod_{i=1}^N M_i$ where $q \mapsto (p_1, \cdots, p_{j-1}, q, p_{j+1}, \cdots, p_k)$ for any choices of $p_i$.
- $\RR^n \injects \RR^{n+k}$ by $(x^1, \cdots, x^n) \mapsto (x^1, \cdots, x^n, 0, \cdots, 0)$.

Counterexamples:

- Failing immersion: The curve $\gamma: \RR \to \RR^2$ where $t\mapsto \thevector{t^3, 0}$ is a smooth topological embedding but not a smooth embedding since $\gamma'(0)= 0$ (so it fails to be an immersion).

- Failing topological embedding: the figure-eight curve $\beta: (-\pi ,\pi) \to \RR^2$ where $t\mapsto \thevector{\sin(2t), \sin(t)}$ is an injective smooth immersion since $\beta'(t) \neq 0$ for any $t$, but not an embedding because its image is compact and its domain is not.

- Failing topological embedding: the curve $\gamma: \RR\to T^2$ given by $t \mapsto \thevector{e^{2\pi i t}, e^{2\pi i \alpha t}}$ where $\alpha$ is irrational is a smooth immersion since $\gamma'(t) \neq 0$ and injective since $\gamma(t) = \gamma(s) \implies t-s, \alpha(t-s) \in \ZZ$ which can not happen.

    But one can use Dirichlet's approximation theorem to show that $\gamma(0)$ is a limit point of $\gamma(\ZZ)$, whereas $\ZZ$ has no limit points in $\RR$, so $\gamma$ can not be a homeomorphism onto its image.


Theorem (Dirichlet's Approximation Theorem)
: For $\alpha\in \RR, N\in \ZZ^{> 0}$, there exist $n, m$ such that $1\leq n \leq N$ and $\abs{n\alpha - m} < {1\over N}$.

Proposition
:   If any of the following hold for $F:M\to N$, then $F$ is a smooth embedding:

    - $F$ is an open or a closed map.
    - $F$ is a proper map.
    - $M$ is compact.
    - $\bd M = \emptyset$ and $\dim M = \dim N$.

Application: $\iota S^n \injects \RR^{n+1}$ is smooth and $d\iota_p$ is injective at every $p\in S^n$. 
Since $S^n$ is compact, $\iota$ is a smooth embedding.

Theorem (Local Embedding Theorem)
: $F$ is a smooth immersion $\iff F$ is locally a smooth embedding: every $p\in M$ admits a neighborhood $U\ni p$ such that $\restrictionof{F}{U}:U\to N$ is a smooth embedding.

This leads to formulating the following definition:

Definition (Topological Immersion)
: A continuous map $F:X\to Y$ is a *topological immersion* iff every $p\in X$ admits a neighborhood on which $F$ is a topological embedding.

Definition (Local Sections)
: A *local section* $\sigma$ of a continuous map $\pi:M\to N$ is a continuous map $\sigma: U\to M$ for some open $U\subseteq N$ such that $\pi \circ \sigma = \id_U$.
