# Monday, July 12

Talk: Danny Krashen


## Intro
\todo[inline]{Missed first 13m}

## Galois Cohomology

:::{.definition title="Galois Cohomology"}
For $G_k\actson M$, we can take invariants $M^{G_k}$.
The functor $\wait^{G_k}$ is ?-exact, so we define $H^*_\gal(G_k; \wait) \da \RR^*(\wait)^{G_k}$.

:::


:::{.remark}
The tensor product on $\mods{G_k}$ induces a cup product ???

An important example is $M = \mu_\ell^{\tensor m}$, where $\mu_\ell^{\tensor 0} \da \ZZ/n$.

- $H^*(G_k; \mu^{\tensor 0}) = \ZZ/n$
- ?


We'll define *symbols* $(a_1, \cdots, a_n) \da (a_1) \cupprod \cdots \cupprod (a_n) \in H^*(k, \mu_\ell^{\tensor n})$, which are in fact generators.
To remember the $\ell$, we write $(\elts{a}{n})_\ell$.
:::


:::{.remark}
Galois cohomology is a special case of etale cohomology, where $H^*(G_k; M) = \H_\et^*(k; M) = H_\et^n(\spec k; M)$ which works for schemes other than just $\spec k$.
:::

## Milnor K-Theory

:::{.definition title="?"}
Given $k\in \Field$, define
\[
K_0^M(k) \da \bigoplus _{i=1}^\infty k_i^M(k)
\]
where

- $K_0^M(k) = \ZZ$
- $K_1^M(k) = k^m$, written additively as elements $\ts{a}$ on the left-hand side, so $\ts{a} + \ts{b} \da \ts{ab}$.
- It's generated by $K_1^M(k)$, with products written by concatenation:
\[
\ts{a_1, \cdots, a_n} = \ts{a_1} \ts{a_2} \cdots \ts{a_n}
.\]
- The only relations are $\ts{a, b} = 0$ when $a+b=1$, motived by $(a, b)_\ell = 0 \in H^2_\gal(k, \mu_\ell^{\tensor 2})$ exactly when $a+b=1$.
- There is a map
\[
K_0^M(k) &\to H^*(k; \mu_\ell^{\tensor 0}) \\
\ts{a} &\mapsto (a)
,\]
and the Norm-Residue isomorphism (formerly the Bloch-Kato conjecture) states that this is an isomorphism after modding out by $\ell$, i.e. 
\[
K_0^M(k)/\ell \mapsvia{\sim} H^*(k; \mu_\ell^{\tensor 0})
.\]

:::

## Witt Ring


:::{.remark}
Assume $\ch k \neq 2$, so there is a correspondence between quadratic forms and symmetric bilinear forms:
\[
\text{Quadratic forms} &\mapstofrom \text{Symmetric bilinear forms} \\
q(x) \da b(x,x) &\mapsfrom b(x, y) \\
q &\mapsto b(x,y) \da {1\over 2}\qty{q(x+y) - q(x) - q(y)}
.\]
We say $q$ is nondegenerate if $V \mapsvia{\sim} V\dual$ is an isomorphism.
:::


:::{.definition title="The Witt Ring"}
The **Witt ring** $W(k)$ is generated as an abelian group by isomorphism classes of pairs $q \da (V, q)$ where $q$ is a symmetric bilinear form on a vector space $V$, modulo the ideal generated by

- $(q_1 + q_2) - (q_1 \perp q_2)$
- The *hyperbolic* form $xy$ is $0 \in W(k)$.

The ring structure is given by the tensor product (a.k.a. Kronecker product of forms).
:::


:::{.remark}
Noting that Galois cohomology lives $\mod \ell$ for various $\ell$, here $K_0^M(k)$ lives over $\ZZ$.
So Milnor K-theory relates all of the various $\mod \ell$ Galois cohomologies together.

We can look at a **fundamental ideal** $I(k) \normal W(k)$, the ideal of even dimensional forms, and set $I^n(k) \da (I(k))^n$.
Then there is a map
\[
K_n^M(k) &\to I^n(k) / I^{n+1}(k) \\
\ts{\elts{a}{n}} &\mapsto \dgens{\elts{a}{n}}
.\]

This follows from Gram-Schmidt: any form can be diagonalized $q \cong \sum a_i x_i^2$, which we can write as $\gens{\elts{a}{n}}$.
We can define $\gens{\gens{ a }} \da \gens{\gens{1, -a}}$ and $\gens{\gens{\elts{a}{n}}} = \prod_i \dgens{a_i}$, the $n\dash$fold ? forms.
\todo[inline]{Missed}

The Milnor conjecture (proved by Voevodsky et al) is that this is an isomorphism after modding out by 2, i.e. 
\[
K_n^M(k)/2 \mapsvia{\sim} I^n(k) / I^{n+1}(k)
.\]
Moreover, the LHS is isomorphic to $H^n(k, \mu_2)$.

There are interesting maps going the other way
\[
I^n(k) \to I^n(k) / I^{n+1}(k) \mapsvia{\sim} H^n(k, \mu_2)
,\]
and the punchline is that this is surjective -- any $\mod 2$ cohomology class comes from a quadratic form.
Thus we can reason about cohomology by reasoning about various combinations and properties of quadratic forms.
:::

## Motivic Cohomology


:::{.remark}
Motivic cohomology relates the various $\mod \ell$ cohomologies together much like $K_*^M$ but also relates different twists.
In particular, it relates various $H^i(k; \mu_\ell^{\tensor j})$, where Milnor K-theory interprets this when $i=j$.
This works by constructing motivic complexes $\ZZ(m)$, which are complexes of presheaves on $X\in \sm\Sch_{/k}$, usually considered in the Zariski, étale, or Nisnevich topologies.

The Zariski hypercohomology is defined as $\HH^n(X; \ZZ(m)) = H^{n, m}(X; \ZZ) = H_\mot^n(X; \ZZ(m))$ for $X = \spec k$.
These relate to Galois cohomology in the following ways:

- There is a quasi-isomorphism $\mu_\ell^{\tensor m} \mapsvia{\sim} \ZZ/\ell(n)$ in the etale topology.
- There is an isomorphism $H^n_\zar(k, \ZZ(n)) \mapsvia{\sim} K_n^M(k)$.
- Bloch-Kato identifies $H_\zar^*(X; \ZZ/\ell(n)) \mapsvia{\sim} H_\et^n(X; \ZZ/\ell(n))$.
:::


:::{.remark}
There are a number of competing notions for the "dimension" of a field.
:::

:::{.definition title="Dimension of a field"}
If $k$ is finitely generated over either a prime field or an algebraically closed field, we say
\[
dim(k) 
=
\begin{cases}
[k: k_0]_\tr & k_0 = \bar k_0  
\\
[k: k_0]_\tr +1 & k_0 \text{ finite}
[k: k_0]_\tr + 2 & k_0 = \QQ.
\end{cases}
.\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Cohomological dimension of a field"}
We define its **cohomological dimension** $\cohdim(k)$, which is at most $n$ if $H^n(G_k; M) = 0$ for all $m>n$ and $M$ torsion,
\[
\cohdim(k) \da \min \ts{n \st \cohdim(k) \leq n}
.\]
Equivalently, $\cohdim(k) = n \iff$ there exists a torsion $M$ with $H^n(G_k; M) \neq 0$ and $H^m(G_k; M) = 0$ for all $m>n$.

:::

:::{.remark}
$\cohdim(k) = \dim(k)$ if $k$ is finitely generated or a finite extension of $k_0 = \bar k_0$, or if $k$ is finitely generated over $\QQ$ and has no real orderings.
So if $k$ has orderings, $\cohdim(k) = \infty$.
:::


:::{.definition title="$C_n$ property"}
We say $k$ is $C_n$ if for $d>0$ and $m>d^n$, then every homogeneous polynomials of degree $d$ in $m$ variables has a nontrivial root.
:::


:::{.definition title="Diophantine Dimension"}
\[
\ddim(k) \da \min\ts{n\st k \text{ is } C_n}
.\]

:::


:::{.example title="?"}
If $k$ is finitely generated or finite over $k_0 = \bar k_0$, then 
\[
\ddim(k) = \dim(k) = \cohdim(k)
.\]
:::


:::{.definition title="$T_n$ property"}
We say $k$ is $T_n$ if for every $\elts{d}{r} > 0$ and every system of polynomial equations $f_1 = \cdots = f_r = 0$ with $\deg f_i = d_i$ in $m$ variables, with $m > \sum d_i^n$.
Then the thin rank is defined as
\[
\thinrank(k) \da \min\ts{n \st k \text{ is } T_n}
.\]
:::

:::{.question}
Note that $T_n\implies C_n$, so $\thinrank(k) \geq \ddim(k)$, when are they equal?
This is likely unknown.
:::


:::{.remark}
There is a famous example of a field $k$ with $\cohdim(k)=1$ but $\ddim(k) = \infty$.
:::


:::{.question}
Is it true that $\ddim(k) \geq \cohdim(k)$?
Serre showed that this holds when $\cohdim$ is replaced by $\cohdim_2$, the 2-primary part -- does this hold for all $p$?
These are both open.

Why would one expect this to be true?
:::


:::{.remark}
A recent result: $\cohdim_p$ grows at most linearly in $\ddim$, with slope not 1 but rather $\approx \log_2 p$.
These questions say that if an equation has enough variables then there is a solution, but why should this be reflected in cohomology?
To show this bound, one would want to show that given some $\alpha \in H^*(k)$, there exists a polynomial $f_\alpha$ where if $f_\alpha$ has a root, $\alpha = 0$ in homology.
In special cases, we were able to come up with such polynomials.
When $\alpha$ is a symbol, this is closely related to *norm varieties* which have a point iff $\alpha$ is split.
One might optimistically hope these are described as hypersurfaces, from which answers to the above would follow, but they turn out to not have such a concrete realization.
:::


## Structural Problems in Galois Cohomology


:::{.remark}
Here we'll describe the problems we need help with!
Perhaps insight from motivic cohomology will lend insight to them.
We'll write $H^i(k) \da H^i(k, \mu_\ell^{\tensor j})$.
:::

### Period-Index Problems


:::{.definition title="?"}
If $\alpha \in H^i(k)$, we say $L/k$ **splits** $\alpha$ if $\ro{\alpha}{L} = 0\in H^i(L)$.
:::


:::{.definition title="?"}
We define the **index**
\[
\ind \alpha \da \gcd\ts{[L:k] \st L/k \text{ finite and splits } \alpha}
.\]
and the ???
\[
\per \alpha \da \order \alpha \leq \ell
.\]
:::


:::{.remark}
One can show that $\per \alpha \divides \ind \alpha$, and $\ind \alpha \divides \qty{\per \alpha}^m$ for some $m$.
:::


:::{.question}
For a fixed $k$ and $i, j, \ell$, which is the minimum $m$ such that 
\\[
\ind \alpha \divides \qty{\per \alpha}^m
?\]
Alternatively, what is the minimum $m$ such that $\ind \alpha \divides \ell^m$?
:::


:::{.conjecture}
If $\ddim(k) = n$ (or $\dim(k) = n$ since $k$ is finitely generated) with $\alpha \in H^2(k, \mu_\ell)$, then 
\[
\ind \alpha \divides \qty{\per \alpha}^{n-1}
.\]
:::


:::{.remark}
Even in this case, no known bound is known for $k = \QQ(t)$, for any choice of $\ell$.
How complicated can the cohomology class be?
The rough idea is that for $H^i(k)$ with $i$ near $\dim k$, this should have a small index and if $i=\dim k$ then $\per k = \ind k$.
:::


:::{.remark}
We know $\per = \ind$ for any number field for classes in $H^2(\spec k; \mu_N)$, with or without roots.
:::


### Symbol Length Problem


:::{.remark}
We know $H^n(k, \muelln)$ is generated by symbols $(\elts{a}{n})$.
We can use symbol length to measure complexity, leading to the following:
:::

:::{.question}
Given $k, n$, what is the minimal number $m$ such that every $\alpha\in H^n(k)$ is a sum of no more than $m$ symbols.
:::


:::{.remark}
I.e. how easy is it to write $\alpha$?
We'd like a bound in terms of $\ddim(k), \dim(k)$.
One can construct fields needing arbitrarily long symbols, but perhaps for finite dimensional fields, one feels there should be a bound.
Danny feels that there may not be such a bound once $n\geq 4$.
:::


:::{.remark}
What's known: for number fields (or global fields, i.e. a reasonable notion of dimension with $\dim k = 2$) which lie over finitely generated or prime fields and have a primitive $\ell$th root of unity, we know every class in $H^2$ can be written as exactly one symbol.
:::


:::{.remark}
A result of Malgri (?): assuming we have roots of unity, if $\ell = p^t$, then for $H^2$ one needs at most $t(p^{\ddim(k)-1}-1)$ symbols.
If $\ddim(k)< \infty$ this yields a bound, and conjecturally this shouldn't depend on ???

For higher degree cohomology, we know almost nothing except for special cases of $H^4$ for "3-dimensional" $p\dash$adic curves.
:::


:::{.remark}
If one can bound the symbol length, one can uniformly write down a generic element in cohomology as a sum of at most $n$ symbols.
The inability to be able to write down a general form of a cohomology class for a given field is what makes this difficult -- they have "complexity" that isn't necessarily bounded in a known way.
:::


























