# Tuesday, January 26


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.3.3"}
Prove the 5-lemma.
Suppose the following rows are exact:

\begin{tikzcd}
	{A_1} && {A_2} && {A_3} && {A_4} && {A_5} \\
	\\
	{B_1} && {B_2} && {B_3} && {B_4} && {B_5}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow[from=1-7, to=1-9]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=3-7]
	\arrow[from=3-7, to=3-9]
	\arrow["{f_1}"{description}, from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{f_2}"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{f_3}"{description}, from=1-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow["{f_4}"{description}, from=1-7, to=3-7]
	\arrow["{f_5}"{description}, from=1-9, to=3-9]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMTAsWzAsMCwiQV8xIl0sWzIsMCwiQV8yIl0sWzQsMCwiQV8zIl0sWzYsMCwiQV80Il0sWzgsMCwiQV81Il0sWzAsMiwiQl8xIl0sWzIsMiwiQl8yIl0sWzQsMiwiQl8zIl0sWzYsMiwiQl80Il0sWzgsMiwiQl81Il0sWzAsMV0sWzEsMl0sWzIsM10sWzMsNF0sWzUsNl0sWzYsN10sWzcsOF0sWzgsOV0sWzAsNSwiZl8xIiwxXSxbMSw2LCJmXzIiLDFdLFsyLDcsImZfMyIsMV0sWzMsOCwiZl80IiwxXSxbNCw5LCJmXzUiLDFdXQ==)

- Show that if $f_1, f_2, f_4, f_5$ are isomorphisms then $f_4$ is an isomorphism.
- Show that if $f_2, f_4$ are monic and $f_1$ is an epi, then $f_3$ is monic.
- Show that if $f_2, f_4$ are monic and $f_5$ is monic, then $f_3$ is an epi.

:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.4.2"}
Consider the following complex:

% https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCJcXGNkb3RzIl0sWzIsMCwiXFxaWi80XFxaWiJdLFs0LDAsIlxcWlovNFxcWloiXSxbNiwwLCJcXFpaLzRcXFpaIl0sWzgsMCwiXFxjZG90cyJdLFswLDEsIlxcY2RvdCAyIl0sWzEsMiwiXFxjZG90IDIiXSxbMiwzLCJcXGNkb3QgMiJdLFszLDQsIlxcY2RvdCAyIl1d
\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots && {\ZZ/4\ZZ} && {\ZZ/4\ZZ} && {\ZZ/4\ZZ} && \cdots
	\arrow["{\cdot 2}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\cdot 2}", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{\cdot 2}", from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow["{\cdot 2}", from=1-7, to=1-9]
\end{tikzcd}

Show this complex is acyclic but not split exact: there is no map $s$ such that $ds + sd = \one$, and there is no decomposition $C_n \cong Z_n \oplus B_n'$.
:::

:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.4.3"}
Show that $C$ is a split exact chain complex if and only if $\id_C$ is nullhomotopic.
:::

:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.4.5"}
Show that chain homotopy classes of maps form a quotient category $K$ of $\Ch(\rmod)$ and that the functors $H_n$ factor through the quotient functor $\Ch(\rmod) \to K$ using the following steps:

1. Show that chain homotopy equivalence is an equivalence relation on $\ts{f:C\to D \st f\text{ is a chain map}}$.
  Define $\Hom_K(C, D)$ to be the equivalence classes of such maps and show that it is an abelian group.

2. Let $f \homotopic g: C\to D$ be two chain homotopic maps.
  If $u: B\to C, v:D\to E$ are chain maps, show that $vfu, vgu$ are chain homotopic.
  Deduce that $K$ is a category when the objects are defined as chain complexes and the morphisms are defined as in (1).

3. Let $f_0, f_1, g_0, g_1: C\to D$ all be chain maps such that each pair $f_i \homotopic g_i$ are chain homotopic.
  Show that $f_0 + f_1$ is chain homotopic to $g_0 + g_1$.
  Deduce that $K$ is an additive category and $\Ch(\rmod)\to K$ is an additive functor.

4. Is $K$ an abelian category? 
  Explain.

> Try at least two parts.

:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.5.1"}

:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.5.2"}

:::

