# Problem Set 1


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.1.2"}
Show that a morphism $u: C\to D$ of chain complexes preserves boundaries and cycles respectively, hence inducing a map $H_n(C) \to H_n(D)$ for each $n$.
Prove that $H_n: \Ch(\rmod) \to \rmod$ is a functor.

:::

:::{.solution}


:::{.claim title="1"}
The chain map $u$ induces the following well-defined maps:
\[
Z_n(u): Z_n(C) &\to Z_n(D) \\
B_n(u): B_n(C) &\to B_n(D)
.\]
:::

:::{.proof title="of claim (1)"}
We'll use the convention that $Z_n \da \ker d_n$ and $B_n \da \im d_{n+1}$ where we index chain complexes as $C_\wait = \qty{ \cdots \to C_{n+1} \mapsvia{d_{n+1}^C} C_n \mapsvia{d_n^C} C_{n-1} \to \cdots}$.
Unraveling definitions, we would like to show the existence of maps
\[
Z_n(u): \ker d_n^C &\to \ker d_n^D \\
B_n(u): \im d_{n+1}^C &\to \im d_{n+1}^D
.\]

It suffices to show

a. $x\in \ker d_n^C \implies u_n(x) \in \ker d_n^D$, and
b. $y \in \im d_{n+1}^C \implies u_n(y) \in \im d_{n+1}^D$.

Since $u$ is a morphism of chain complexes, we have a commuting ladder where $u_{n-1} \circ d_n^C = d_n^D \circ u_n$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots && {C_{n+1}} && {C_n} && {C_{n-1}} && \cdots \\
	\\
	\cdots && {D_{n+1}} && {D_n} && {D_{n-1}} && \cdots
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{d_n^C}", color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow["{d_{n-1}^C}", from=1-7, to=1-9]
	\arrow["{u_n}", color={rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}, from=1-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow["{d_{n-1}^D}"', from=3-7, to=3-9]
	\arrow["{d_n^D}"', color={rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}, from=3-5, to=3-7]
	\arrow["{d_{n+1}^D}"', from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{u_{n+1}}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{u_{n-1}}", color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=1-7, to=3-7]
	\arrow["{d_{n+1}^C}", from=1-3, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)

To see that (a) holds, we compute
\[
x \in \ker d_n^C &&\leq C_n \\
&\iff d_n^C(x)= 0_R &\in C_{n-1} \\
&\iff (u_{n-1} \circ d_n^C) (x) = 0_R &\in D_{n-1} && \text{since $u_n$ is a ring morphism and sends $0_r\to 0_R$}\\
&\implies (d_n^D \circ u_n)(x) = 0_R&\in D_{n-1} && \text{using commutativity} \\
&\implies x\in \ker (d_n^D \circ u_n) & \leq D_{n-1} \\
&\iff u_n(x) \in \ker d_n^D & \leq D_n
.\]

Similarly, for (b) we have
\[
y \in \im d_{n+1}^C 
&\iff \exists x\in C_{n+1} \text{ such that } d_{n+1}^C(x) = y \\
&\implies u_{n+1}(x) \in D_{n+1} \\
&\implies (d_{n+1}^D \circ u_{n+1})(x) \in \im d_{n+1}^D \leq D_{n} \\
&\implies (u_n \circ d_{n+1}^C)(x) \in \im d_{n+1}^D \leq D_n && \text{using commutativity} \\
&\iff u_n(y) \in \im d_{n+1}^D && \text{using } d_{n+1}^C(x) = y
.\]

:::

Now noting that $H_n(C) \da Z_n(C) / B_n(C)$, since $u_n$ preserves $Z_n$ there is a well-defined restriction of each $u_n: C_n \to D_n$ to $u_n: Z_n(C) \to Z_n(D)$.
Composing with the projection $Z_n(D) \to Z_n(D)/B_n(D) \da H_n(D)$ yields maps $u_n: Z_n(C) \to H_n(D)$.


:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.1.4"}
Show that for every $A\in \rmod$ and $C\in \Ch(\rmod)$ that $D_\wait \da \Hom_{\rmod}(A, C_\wait)$ is a chain complex of abelian groups.
Taking $A \da Z_n$, show that $H_n(D_\wait) = 0 \implies H_n(C_\wait) = 0$.
Is the converse true?
:::


:::{.solution}
We first show that if $A\in \rmod$ and $C \in \Ch(\rmod)$, then $D \da \Hom_{\rmod}(A, C)$ is a chain complex of abelian groups.


1. $D_n$ is an abelian group for all $n$:
  Define an operation
\[
+_D: D^n \cross D^n &\to D^n \\
(f, g) & \mapsto 
\left\{
\begin{aligned}
A & \mapsvia{f+g}  C_n \\
x &\mapsto f(x) +_C g(x)
\end{aligned}
\right\},
  \]
  where $+_C$ is the addition on $C_n$ provided by its structure as an \(R\dash\)module.
  We can then check that this operation is commutative:
  \[
  (f+_D g)(x) 
  &\da f(x) +_C g(x) \\
  &= g(x) +_C f(x) && \text{since the addition on $C_n$ is commutative} \\
  &= (g+_D f)(x)
  ,\]
  The additive inverse of $f$ is $-f$, there is an identity function $\id_{C_n}(x) \da x$, and the sum of two functions $A\to C_n$ is again a function $A\to C_n$, making $D_n$ an abelian group for all $n$.

2. There exist differentials $D_n  \mapsvia{d_n^D} D_{n-1}$:

  Noting that we have differentials $C_n \mapsvia{d_n^C} C_{n-1}$, we can define
  \[
  d_n^D: D_n &\to D_{n-1} \\
  (A \mapsvia{f} C_n) & \mapsto (A \mapsvia{f} C_n \mapsvia{d_n^C} C_{n-1})
  ,\]
  i.e. we send $f\mapsto d_n^C \circ f$ be precomposing with the differential from $C_*$.

3. $(d^D)^2 = 0$:
  We can explicitly write
  \[
  (d^D)^2: D_n &\to D_{n-2} \\
  (A \mapsvia{f} C_n) &\mapsto (A \mapsvia{f} C_n \mapsvia{d_n^C} C_{n-1} \mapsvia{d_{n-1}^C} C_{n-2})
  ,\]
  and so $f \mapsto d_{n-1}^C \circ d_n^C \circ f$.
  The claim is that this is the zero map, which follows from writing this as $(d^C)^2 \circ f = 0\circ f$, using that $C_*$ is a chain complex, which is necessarily the zero map.
  







:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.1.6: Homology of a graph"}
Let \( \Gamma \) be a finite graph with vertices $V \da \ts{v_1, \cdots, v_V}$ and edge $E \da \ts{e_1, \cdots, e_E}$.
Define the **incidence matrix** of \( \Gamma \) to be the $V\times E$ matrix $A$ where 
\[
A_{ij} = 
\begin{cases}
1 & e_j \text{ starts at } v_i, 
\\
-1 & e_j \text{ ends at } v_i,
\\
0 & \text{else}.
\end{cases}
\]
Define a chain complex by taking free $R\dash$modules:
\[
C_\wait = (\cdots \to 0 \to C_1 \da R[V] \mapsvia{d}  C_0 \da R[V] \to 0 \to \cdots)
,\]
where $d: C_1\to C_0$ is given by $A$.
If \( \Gamma \) is connected, show that $H_0(C)$ and $H_1(C)$ are free \(R\dash\)modules of dimensions 1 and $V-E-1$ respectively.

> Hint: choose a basis \( \ts{v_0, v_1 - v_0, \cdots, v_V - v_0} \) and use a path from $v_0 \leadsto v_i$ to produce an element $e\in C_1$ with $d(e) = v_i - v_0$.


:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.1.7: Tetrahedra"}
The **tetrahedron** $T$ is a surface with 4 vertices, 6 edges, and 4 faces of dimension 2, and its homology is the homology of the complex
\[
C_\wait \da (\cdots \to 0 \to R^4 \to R^6 \to R^4 \to 0 \to \cdots)
.\]
Write down the matrices in this complex and computationally verify that 
\[
H_*(T) = [R, 0, R, 0, \cdots]
.\]

:::


:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.2.3"}
Let \( \mathcal{A}  \) be the category $\Ch(\rmod)$ and let $f$ be a chain map.
Show that the complex $\ker f$ is a (categorical) kernel of $f$ and that $\cok f$ is a (categorical) cokernel of $f$.

> Verify exactness in the Snake Lemma in at least two other positions.
:::



:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.4.3"}
Show that $C$ is a split exact chain complex if and only if $\id_C$ is nullhomotopic.
:::



:::{.problem title="Weibel 1.4.5"}
Show that chain homotopy classes of maps form a quotient category $K$ of $\Ch(\rmod)$ and that the functors $H_n$ factor through the quotient functor $\Ch(\rmod) \to K$ using the following steps:

1. Show that chain homotopy equivalence is an equivalence relation on $\ts{f:C\to D \st f\text{ is a chain map}}$.
  Define $\Hom_K(C, D)$ to be the equivalence classes of such maps and show that it is an abelian group.

2. Let $f \homotopic g: C\to D$ be two chain homotopic maps.
  If $u: B\to C, v:D\to E$ are chain maps, show that $vfu, vgu$ are chain homotopic.
  Deduce that $K$ is a category when the objects are defined as chain complexes and the morphisms are defined as in (1).

3. Let $f_0, f_1, g_0, g_1: C\to D$ all be chain maps such that each pair $f_i \homotopic g_i$ are chain homotopic.
  Show that $f_0 + f_1$ is chain homotopic to $g_0 + g_1$.
  Deduce that $K$ is an additive category and $\Ch(\rmod)\to K$ is an additive functor.

4. Is $K$ an abelian category? 
  Explain.

> Try at least two parts.

:::

