# Tuesday, March 30

\todo[inline]{Missing lecture}

:::{.remark}
Today: $L\dash$spaces and the surgery exact triangle.
We've been loosely following [@OS-1], references for upcoming topics include [@OS-2] and Jen Hom's survey [@H].
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that we were discussing $\HF^-(M, s)$ for $M\in \Mfd^3(\RR)$ and $s$ a $\Spinc$ structure, and if $M\in \QHS$ this decomposes as $\ZZ/2[u] \oplus \qty{\bigoplus_i {\ZZ/2[u] \over \gens{u^{}n_i} }} \da \ZZ/2[u] \oplus \HF_\red(M, s)$.
The Maslov grading of $1$ in the first summand is the **$d\dash$invariant**, $d(M, s)$.
If one defines \( d(M) \da \sum_{s\in \Spinc(M)} d(M, s) \), then $d: \Theta^3_\QQ \to \QQ$ is a group homomorphism.
We want to talk about $X\in \Mfd^3$ which have the "simplest" Floer theory, in the sense that the torsion summand above vanishes.
:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
A manifold $M\in\QHS^3$ is an **$L\dash$space** if $\HF_\red(M, s) = 0$, which happens if and only if $\HF^-(M, s) = \ZZ/2[u]$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that there is an exact triangle

\begin{tikzcd}
	{\HF^-(M, s)} && {\HF^-(M, s)} \\
	\\
	& {\hat\HF-(M, s)}
	\arrow["{\cdot u}", tail reversed, from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["p", from=1-3, to=3-2]
	\arrow["0", from=3-2, to=1-1]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJcXEhGXi0oTSwgcykiXSxbMiwwLCJcXEhGXi0oTSwgcykiXSxbMSwyLCJcXGhhdFxcSEYtKE0sIHMpIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxjZG90IHUiLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJhcnJvd2hlYWQifX19XSxbMSwyLCJwIl0sWzIsMCwiMCJdXQ==)

Since multiplication by $u$ is injective, we obtain 
\[
\hat{\Hf} = \im p \cong {\HF^-(M, s) \over \ker p} \cong {\ZZ/2[u] \over u \ZZ/2[u] } \cong \ZZ/2
.\]

:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
So $\Hf^-(M, s) \cong \ZZ/2[u] \implies \hat{\HF}(M, s) \cong \ZZ/2$.
Show the converse is also true.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
$M$ is an $L\dash$space if and only if $\hat{\HF}(M, s) \cong \ZZ/2$ for all $s\in \Spinc(M)$.
This happens if and only if $\rk_{\ZZ[u]} \hat{\HF}(M, s) = 1$, if and only if $\# \Spinc(M) = \# H^2(M) \equalsbecause{\PD} \# H^1(M)$, which is finite for $\QHS$.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
Any $M\in \QHS^3$ is an $L\dash$space if and only if $\rk_{\ZZ[u]} \hat{\HF}(M) = \# H^1(M)$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that we've proved the forward implication but not the reverse.
This is sometimes used as a definition in talks!

Sketch of the proof ($\impliedby$):
A computation will show that \( \chi \hat{\HF}(M, s) = \pm 1 \) for all $s$, since the grading can be shifted.
This is proved in [@OS-2 p.33], and is the main ingredient in this proof.
This implies that $\rk \hat{\HF}(M, s) \geq 1$, and so adding all summands yields \( \rk \hat{\HF}(M) \geq \# H_1(M)\).
This implies that \( \hat\HF(M, s) \cong \ZZ/2 \) for all $s$, making $M$ an $L\dash$space.
:::

:::{.remark}
Here note that $\C_*$ is $\ZZ/2\dash$graded, as is $(\hat \CF(M), \bd)$, so we define $\chi(C_*) = \rk C_0 - \rk C_1$.
Since we have a relative $\ZZ\dash$grading given by $\mu$, we get a relative $\ZZ/2\dash$grading given by \( \gr_{\ZZ/2}(x, y) = \gr_\ZZ(x, y) \).
:::




