# Tuesday, February 16


:::{.remark}
Note that critical points can be used to compute the Euler characteristic, using the fact the $\chi(C) = \chi(H_*(C))$, i.e. it can be computed on dimensions of chains or ranks of homology, along with the fact that Morse homology is isomorphic to singular homology.
So e.g. for a 3-manifold $M^3$, we can show
\[
\chi(M^3) = \sum_{i=0}^3 \rk H_i 
= \sum_{i=0}^3 \rk CM_i \\
= 1 - \# \crit_1(f) + \# \crit_2(f) - 1 \\
=0
,\]
since the number of index 2 and index 3 critical points will be the same.
:::

## Symmetric Product Spaces

Let $M^3$ be a closed 3-manifold, then there is a Heegard splitting 
\[
(\Sigma_g, \alpha = \ts{ \alpha_1, \cdots, \alpha_g }, \beta = \ts{ \beta_1, \cdots, \beta_g } =( \Sigma_g, H_ \alpha, H_ \beta) && \bd(H_ \alpha) = \bd( H_ \beta) = \Sigma
,\]
where $M^3 = H_{ \alpha} \coprod_{ \Sigma} H_ \beta$ and $g$ is the genus of $HD$.
We refer to \( \Sigma \) as a **Heegard surface**, and this set of data as a **Heegard diagram**.

We'll define $\Sym^g( \Sigma)$ by letting $S_g \actson \Sigma^{\prod^g}$ where if \( \varphi\in S_g \) we set \( \varphi(x_1, \cdots, x_g) = x_{ \varphi(1)}, \cdots, x_{ \varphi(g) } \).
Then set \( \Sigma^{\prod^g} \da \Sigma^{\prod g} / S_g \).
Why does this yield a smooth manifold?
Is this action free?
The diagonal \( D \subseteq \Sigma^{\prod g} \) consists of the points with at least 2 equal coordinates, and it's easy to see that $S_g\actson D$ can not be free.
However, this still yields a smooth submanifold!


:::{.lemma title="?"}
\( \Sym^g(\Sigma) \) is smooth, and any complex structure $j$ on \( \Sigma \) will induce a complex structure on the quotient, denoted \( \Sym^g(j) \), which is unique in the sense that the quotient map \( \Sigma^{\prod g} \mapsvia{\pi} \Sym^g(\Sigma) \) is holomorphic.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
We'll check this locally, and then leave it as an exercise to check that it extends globally -- this is easy by just considering what happens under transition functions.
Locally we want to produce a map 
\[ 
\Sym^g(\CC) &\mapsvia{f} \CC^g \\
\ts{ z_1, \cdots, z_g } &\mapsto \qty{ \prod_{i=1}^g (z-z_i) = z^g +a_1 z^{g-1} + \cdots + a_g &\mapsto [a_1, \cdots, a_g] }
.\]
This is a bijection, and by the fundamental theorem of algebra, there is an inverse.
Equip $\Sym^g(\CC)$ with a complex structure that makes $f$ biholomorphic, then $\Sym^g(j)$ is the complex structure locally equal to this one.
This structure is obtained by just pulling back the standard complex structure $i\cross i \cross \cdots i$ on $\CC^g$.
:::



