# Wednesday February 26th

We want to show the following identity:

\begin{align*}
\qty{ U(\lieg) \tensor_{U(\lieb)} L } \tensor_\CC M 
\cong
U(\lieg) \tensor_{U(\lieb)} \qty{ L \tensor_\CC M  }
.\end{align*}

Assume $L$ and $M$ are finite dimensional. Then for $N = L \tensor M$, there is a basis of weight vectors $v_1, \cdots, v_n, \nu_1, \cdots, \nu_m$ with $\nu_i \leq \nu_j \iff i\leq j$.
Moreover $N_k = \CC \generators{v_k, \cdots, v_n} = U(\lieb)\generators{v_k, \cdots, v_n}$, and we have a natural filtration

\begin{align*}
0 \subset N_n \subset \cdots \subset N_1 = N
\end{align*}
 with $N_i / N_{i+1} \cong \CC_{v_i}$ as $\lieb\dash$modules.

 We thus obtain $\ind_\lieb^\lieg N_i / \ind_\lieb^\lieg N_{i+1} \cong \ind_\lieb^\lieg \CC_{v_i} = M(v_i)$ by exactness of the Ind functor.
 Apply this to $L = \CC_\lambda$, then the LHS is $M(\lambda) \tensor_\CC M$, where $M$ is finite dimensional.
 On the RHS, $N = \CC_\lambda \tensor M$ has the same dimension as $M$ with weights $\lambda + \mu$ for $\mu \in \Pi(M)$.
 Thus $M(\lambda) \tensor M$ has filtration with quotients $M(\lambda + \mu)$ over $\mu \in \Pi(M)$, which was the theorem we had last time.

 Remark
 : The proof shows that $M(\lambda) \tensor M$ has a submodules $M(\lambda + \mu)$ for any maximal weight $\mu$ of $M$, and a quotient $M(\lambda + \nu)$ where $\nu$ is any minimal weight of $M$.
  We knew that every $M\in \OO$ has a finite filtration, but here the quotients are now Verma modules.
  This will help us study projectives later, which we need to study higher Exts.

## Standard Filtrations

There are several main players in the theory of highest-weight categories, of which $\OO_{\chi_\lambda}$ is one:

- Simple modules: $L(\lambda)$
- Standard modules $M(\lambda)$
- Costandard modules $M(\lambda)\dual$
- Indecomposable projectives $P(\lambda)$
- Tilting modules $T(\lambda)$.

Definition (A standard filtration or Verma flag)
: A *standard filtration* of $M\in \OO$ is a filtration with subquotients isomorphic to Verma modules.

Note that when $M$ has a standard filtration, the submodules are *not* unique, but the length, subquotients, and multiplicities are unique.
We can thus use $K(\OO)$ or formal characters as an invariant, since the multiplicities $(M: M(\lambda))$ are well-defined.

If $M, N$ have standard filtration, then so does $M \oplus N$ by concatenation.
In this case, $(M\oplus N: M(\lambda)) = (M:M(\lambda)) + (N: M(\lambda))$.

Proposition
: Let $M\in \OO$ have a standard filtration. 
  Then

  a. If $\lambda$ is maximal in $\Pi(M)$, then $M$ has a submodule isomorphic to $M(\lambda)$ and $M/M(\lambda)$ has a standard filtration $0 = M_0 \subset \cdots \subsetM_n = M$.
  b. If $M = M' \oplus M''$, then $M'$ and $M''$ have standard filtrations.
  c. $M$ is free as a $U(\lien^-)\dash$module.

Proof (of (a))
: By assumption on $\lambda$, $M$ has a maximal vector of weight $\lambda$, and thus the universal property yields a nonzero morphism $\phi: M(\lambda) \to M$.
  
  The claim is that $\phi$ is injective, from which the proof follows.
  Proof of claim: choose a minimal index $i$ such that $\phi(M(\lambda)) \subset M_i$ in the filtration.
  Follow this with the subquotient map to yield $\psi: M(\lambda) \to M^i \definedas M_i/M_{i-1} \cong M(\mu)$, which is nonzero by minimality of $i$.
  Thus $\lambda \leq \mu$, and by our assumption, this implies $\lambda = \mu$.
  But then $\psi$ sends highest weight vectors to highest weight vectors and is free, so $\psi$ is an isomorphism.
  Thus $\phi$ is injective and $M(\lambda) \subset M$.

  We can now write $M(\lambda) \intersect M_{i-1} = \ker \psi = 0$, so we obtain a direct sum decomposition $M_i \cong M_{i-1} \oplus M(\lambda)$.
  We thus obtain a SES $0 \to M_{i-1} \to M/M(\lambda) \to M/M_i \to 0$.

  We can easily construct standard filtrations for $M_{i-1}$ and $M/M_i$, so the middle term also has a standard filtration.
  Thus $M/M(\lambda)$ has a standard filtration of length one less than that of $M$.

Proof (of(b))
: By induction of the filtration length $n$ of $M$. 
  If $n=0$, $M$ is a Verma module and thus indecomposable and there's nothing to show.
  For $n\geq 1$, let $\pi \in \Pi(M)$ be maximal (which we can always find for $M\in \OO)$),
