# Wednesday January 15th

## Review

The Weyl vector is given by $\rho = \bar \omega_1 + \cdots + \bar \omega_\ell = \frac 1 2 \sum_{\beta \in \Phi^+} \beta \in \Lambda^+$.

- If $\alpha \in \Delta$ then $(\pho, \alpha\dual) = 1$
- $s_\alpha(\rho) = \rho - \alpha$.

Let $\lambda \in \Lambda^+$; a few facts:

1. The size of $\theset{\mu\in \Lambda^+ \suchthat \mu \leq \lambda}$ (with the partial order from last time) is finite.
2. $w\lambda < \lambda$ for all $w\in W$.

The Weyl chamber (for a fixed root, $E =$ Euclidean space) is $C = \theset{\lambda \in E \suchthat (\lambda, \alpha) > 0 ~ \forall \alpha\in\Delta}$
(Note that the hyperplane splits $E$ into connected components, we mark this component as distinguished.)

- A connected component of the union of hyperplanes is orthogonal to roots
- They're in bijection with $\Delta$
- They're permuted simply transitively by $W$.

And $\bar C$ denotes the fundamental domain.

## Weight Representations

For $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, we let $M_\lambda = \theset{v\in M \suchthat h\cdot v = \lambda(h) v ~\foral h\in\lieh}$ denote a *weight space* of $M$ if $M_\lambda \neq 0$.
In this case, $\lambda$ is a *weight* of $M$.
The dimension of $M_\lambda$ is the *multiplicity* of $\lambda$ in $M$, and we define the set of weights as $\Pi(M) = \theset{\lambda \in \lieh\dual \suchthat M_\lambda \neq 0}$.

Example if $M = \lieg$ under the adjoint action, then $\Pi(M) = \Phi \union \theset{0}$.

Remark:
The weight vectors for distinct weights are linearly independent.
Thus there is a $\lieg\dash$submodule given by $\sum_\lambda M_\lambda$, which is in fact a direct sum.

> Note: It may not be the case that $\sum_\lambda M_\lambda = M$, and can in fact be zero, although this is an odd situation.
> See Humphreys \#1, \#20.2, p. 110.

In our case, we'll have a *weight module* $M = \bigoplus_\lambda M_\lambda$, so $\lieh\actson M$ semisimply.

## Finite-dimensional Modules

Recall Weyl's complete reducibility theorem, which implies that any finite dimensional $\lieg\dash$module is a weight module.
In fact, $\lien, \lien^- \actson M$ nilpotently.

Some facts:

- $\Pi(M) \subset \Lambda$ is a subset of the integral lattice.
- $\Pi(M)$ is $W\dash$invariant.
- $\dim M_\lambda = \dim M_{W\lambda}$ for any $\lambda \in \Pi(M), w\in W$.
