# Wednesday January 8

> Reference:
> Humphrey's "Representations of Semisimple Lie Algebras in the BGG Category $\mathcal{O}$".

> Course Website: [https://faculty.franklin.uga.edu/brian/math-8030-spring-2020](https://faculty.franklin.uga.edu/brian/math-8030-spring-2020)

## Chapter Zero: Review

> Material can be found in Humphreys 1972.
> Assignment zero: practice writing lowercase mathfrak characters!

In this course, we'll take $k = \CC$.

Recall that a Lie Algebra is a vector space $\lieg$ with a bracket $[\wait, \wait]: \lieg\tensor \lieg \to \lieg$ satisfying

- $[x x] = 0$ for all $x\in \lieg$
  - Exercise: this implies $[x y] = -[y x]$. 
    
    > Hint: Consider $[x+y, x+y]$.
    > Note that the converse holds iff $\ch k \neq 2$.
    
    > Exercise: This implies Lie Algebras never have an identity.

- $[x [y z]] = [[x y] z] + [y [x z]]$ (The Jacobi identity)
  -  This says $x$ acts as a derivation.

Definition
: $\lieg$ is *abelian* iff $[x y] = 0$ for all $x,y\in\lieg$.

There are also the usual notions (define for rings/algebras) of:

- Subalgebras,
  - A vector subspace that is closed under brackets. 
- Homomorphisms
  - I.e. a linear transformation $\phi$ that commutes with the bracket, i.e. $\phi([x y]) = [\phi(x) \phi(y)]$.
- Ideals

Exercise
: Given a vector space (possibly infinite-dimensional) over $k$, then (exercise) $\liegl(V) \definedas \mathrm{End}_k(V)$ is a Lie algebra when equipped with $[f g] = f\circ g - g\circ f$.

Definition
: A *representation* of $\lieg$ is a homomorphism $\phi: \lieg \to \gl(V)$ for some $V$.

Example
: The adjoint representation is $\ad: \lieg \to \liegl(\lieg)$, where $\ad(x)(y) \definedas [x y]$.

Representations give $\lieg$ the structure of a module over $V$, where $x\cdot v \definedas \phi(x)(v)$.
All of the usual module axioms hold, where now $[x y] \cdot v = x\cdot(\cdot v) - y\cdot(x\cdot v)$.

Example
: The trivial representation $V = k$ where $x\cdot a = 0$.

Definition
: $V$ is *irreducible* (or *simple*) iff $V$ as exactly two $\lieg\dash$invariant subspaces, namely $0, V$.

Definition
: $V$ is *completely reducible* iff $V$ is a direct sum of simple modules, and *indecomposable* iff $V$ can not be written as $V = M \oplus N$, a direct sum of proper submodules.

There are several constructions for creating new modules from old ones:

- The *contragradient/dual* $V\dual \definedas \hom_k(V, k)$ where $(x\cdot f) = -f(x\cdot v)$ for $f\in V\dual, x\in \lieg, v\in V$.
- The direct sum $V\oplus W$ where $x\cdot(v, w) = (x\cdot v, x\cdot w)$ and $x\cdot (v+w) = x\cdot v _ x\cdot w$.
- The tensor product where $x\cdot(v\tensor w) = x\cdot v \tensor w + v\tensor x\cdot w$.
- $\hom_k(V, W)$ where $(x\cdot f)(v) = x\cdot f(v) - f(x\cdot v)$.
  -  Note that if we take $W=k$ then the first term vanishes and this recovers the dual.

## Semisimple Lie Algebras

**Definition:**
The derived ideal is given by $\lieg^{(1)} \definedas [\lieg \lieg] \definedas \spanof_k\qty{\theset{[x y] \suchthat x,y\in\lieg }}$.

> This is the analog of the commutator subgroup.

**Lemma:**
$\lieg$ is abelian iff $\lieg^{(1)} = \theset{0}$, and 1-dimensional algebras are always abelian.

> This follows because if $[x y] \definedas xy = yx$ then $[x y] = 0 \iff xy = yx$.

**Definition:**
A lie group $\lieg$ is *simple* iff the only ideals of $\lieg$ are $0, \lieg$ and $\lieg^{(1)} \neq \theset{0}$.

> Note that thus rules out the zero modules, abelian lie algebras, and particularly 1-dimensional lie algebras.

**Definition:**
The derived series is defined by $\lieg^{(2)} = [\lieg^{(1)} \lieg^{(1)}]$, continuing inductively.
$\lieg$ is said to be solvable if $\lieg^{(n)} = 0$ for some $n$.

**Lemma:**
Abelian implies solvable.

> Review definition of nilpotent algebras.

**Definition:**
$\lieg$ is semisimple (s.s.) iff $\lieg$ has no nonzero solvable ideals.

Exercise: 
Simple implies semisimple.

Some remarks:

1. Semisimple algebras $\lieg$ will usually have solvable subalgebras.
2. $\lieg$ is semisimple iff $\lieg$ has no nonzero abelian ideals.

**Definition:**
The Killing form is given by $\kappa: \lieg \tensor \lieg \to k$ where $\kappa(x, y) = \tr(\ad x ~\ad y)$, which is a symmetric bilinear form.

**Lemma:**
$\kappa([x y], z) = \kappa(x, [y z])$.

Recall that if $\beta: V^{\tensor 2} \to k$ is any symmetric bilinear form, then its radical is defined by

\begin{align*}
\mathrm{rad} \beta = \theset{v\in V \suchthat \beta(v, w) = 0 ~\forall w\in V}
.\end{align*}

**Definition:**
A bilinear form $\beta$ is nondegenerate iff $\mathrm{rad}\beta = 0$.

**Lemma:**
$\mathrm{rad}\kappa \normal \lieg$ is an ideal, which follows by the above associative property.

**Theorem:**
$\lieg$ is semisimple iff $\kappa$ is nondegenerate.

Example:
The standard example of a semisimple lie algebra is $\lieg = \liesl(n, \CC) \definedas \theset{x\in \liegl(n, \CC) \suchthat \tr(x) = 0 }$.

> Note: from now on, $\lieg$ will denote a semisimple lie algebra over $\CC$.

**Theorem (Weyl):**
Every finite dimensional representation of a semisimple $\lieg$ is completely reducible.

> I.e., the category of finite-dimensional representations is relatively uninteresting -- there are no extensions, everything is a direct sum, so once you classify the simple algebras (which isn't terribly difficult) then you have complete information.
