# Friday February 14th

Recall that we have a decomposition $\OO = \bigoplus_{\chi \in \hat\mcz(\lieg)} \OO_\chi$ into infinitesimal blocks, where $\OO_0 \definedas \OO_{\chi_0}$ is the principal block.
Since $0\in\lieh\dual$, we can associate $\chi_0. M_0, L(0) = \CC$ the trivial module for $\lieg$.

## 1.14 -- 1.15: Formal Characters

Some background from finite dimensional representation theory of a finite group $G$ over $\CC$.
The hope is to find matrices for each element of $G$, but this isn't basis invariant.
Instead, we take traces of these matrices, which is less data and basis-independent
This is referred to as the *character* of the representation, and in nice situations, the characters determine the irreducible representations.

For a semisimple lie algebra $\lieg$ and a finite dimensional representation $M$, it's enough to keep track of weight multiplicities when $\lieg$ is the lie algebra associated to a compact lie group $G$.
From this data, the characters can be recovered.
So the data of all pairs $(\dim M_\lambda, \lambda \in \lieh\dual)$ suffices.
To track this information, we introduce a *formal character*.

Remark:
If $G$ is a group and $k$ is a commutative ring, $kG$ is the group ring of $G$.
This has the following properties:

- $\sum a_i g_i + \sum b_i g_i = \sum(a_i + b_i) g_i$
- $\qty{ \sum a_i g_i  } \qty{ \sum b_i g_i  } = \sum_{i, j} a_i b_j g_i g_j$

Let $\ZZ \Lambda$ be the integral group ring of the lattice.
Since $\Lambda$ is an abelian group, and the additive notation would be more difficult.
So we write $\Lambda$ multiplicatively and introduce $e(\lambda)$ for $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, where $e(\lambda) e(\mu) = e(\lambda + \mu)$.
For $M$ a finite dimensional $\lieg\dash$module, the formal character of $M$ is given by

\begin{align*}
\ch M = \sum_{\lambda\in \Lambda} \qty{ M(\lambda)  } e(\lambda) \quad\in \ZZ\Lambda
.\end{align*}

This satisfies

- $\ch(M\oplus N) = \ch(M) + \ch(N)$
- $\ch(M\tensor N) = \ch(M)\ch(N)$
- For $\ch(M) = \sum a_\mu e(\mu)$ and $\ch(N) = \sum b_\nu e(\nu)$, we have $\ch(M) \ch(N) = \sum_{\lambda} \qty{ \sum_{\mu + \nu = \lambda} a_\mu b_\nu } e(\lambda)$

By Weyl's complete reducibility theorem, any semisimple module decomposes into a sum of simple modules.
Thus it suffices to determine that characters of simple modules $L(\lambda)$ for $\lambda \in \Lambda^+$, corresponding to dominant integral weights.
Then we can reconstruct $\ch(M)$ from $\ch L(\lambda)$ for $M\in \OO$.

Specifying the weight spaces dimensions is equivalent to a function $\ch_M: \lieh\dual \to \ZZ^+$ where $\ch_M(\lambda) = \dim M_\lambda$.
The analogy of $e(\lambda)$ in this setting is the characteristic function $e_\lambda$ where $e_\lambda(\mu) = \delta_{\lambda \mu}$ for $\mu \in \lieh\dual$.
We can thus write the function

\begin{align*}
\ch_M = \sum_{\lambda \in \lieh\dual} \qty{ \dim M_\lambda } e_\lambda
.\end{align*}

When $\dim M < \infty$, $\ch_M$ has finite support, although we generally don't have this in $\OO$.

