# Wednesday April 15th

Section 7.6, proved theorem about translation functors on Verma modules.
We fixed an antidominant weight, since we can apply elements of $W$ to obtain the rest.
We proved that translation functors take Verma modules to Verma modules.

Corollary
: If $M\in \OO_\chi$ has a standard filtration, then so does $T_\lambda^\mu M \in \OO_\mu$.

Proof
:   By induction on the length of the filtration, where the length 1 case is handled by the theorem.
    In general we have $0 \to N \to M \to M(w\cdot \lambda) \to 0$ and since $T_\lambda^\mu$ is exact, we can apply it to get another exact sequence.
    ??? See notes.

## Translation Functors and Simple Modules

Proposition
:   Let $\lambda, \mu \in \Lambda$ be antidominant with a facet $F$ such that $\lambda \in F$ and $\mu \in \bar F$.
    Then for all $w\in W$, $T_\lambda^\mu L(w\cdot \lambda)$ is either $L(w\cdot \mu)$ or 0.

Idea: we're pushing $\lambda$ to something more singular.

Proof
:   Apply the exact functor $T_\lambda^\mu$ to the surjection $M(w\cdot \lambda) \surjects L(w\cdot \lambda)$ so obtain $M(w\cdot \mu) \surjects M$ for some $M$.
    Since $M$ is a quotient of a Verma module, it is a highest weight module of highest weight $w\cdot \mu$.
    Suppose $M\neq 0$, we can apply $T_\lambda^\mu$ to $L(w\cdot \lambda) \injects M(w\cdot \lambda) \dual$ to obtain $M(w\cdot \mu) \surjects M \injects M(w\cdot \mu) \dual$, a nonzero map.
    By Theorem 3.3c, the image is the socle, so we obtain $M \cong L(w\cdot \mu)$.


