# Friday January 17th

Let $M$ 

1. be finitely generated, 
2. semisimple $M = \oplus_{\lambda \in \lieh\dual} M_\lambda$, 
3. locally finite 
4. $\dim M_\mu < \infty$ for all $\mu \in \lieh\dual$,
5. satisfy the forest condition for weights.

**Theorem:**

a. $\mathcal O$ is Noetherian (ascending chain condition on submodules, i.e. no infinite filtrations by submodules)
b. $\mathcal O$ is closed under quotients, submodules, finite direct sums
c. $\mathcal O$ is abelian (similar to a category of modules)
d. If $M\in \mathcal O$, $\dim L < \infty$, then $L \tensor M \in \mathcal O$ and the endofunctor $M \mapsto L\tensor M$ is exact
e. If $M\in \mathcal O$ is locally $Z(\lieg)\dash$finite (recall: this is the center of $U(\lieg)$), i.e. $\dim\spanof Z(\lieg)\cdot v < \infty$ for all $v\in M$.
f. $M\in \mathcal O$ is finitely generated module. (?) 

*Proofs of a and b:*
See BA II, page 103.

*Proof of c:*
Implied by (b), BA II Page 330.

*Proof of d:*
Can check that $L\tensor M$ satisfies 2 and 3 above.
Need to check first condition.
Take a basis $\theset{v_i}$ for $L$ and $\theset{w_j}$ a finite set of generators for $M$.
The claim is that $B = \theset{v_i \tensor w_j}$ generates $L\tensor M$.
Let $N$ be the submodule generated by $B$.

For any $v\in V$, $v\tensor w_j \in N$.
For arbitrary $x\in \lieg$, compute $x\cdot(v\tensor w_j) = (x\cdot v) \tensor w_j + x\tensor (v\cdot w_j)$.
Since the LHS is in $N$ and the first term on the RHS is in $N$, the entire RHS is in $N$.
By iterating, we find that $v\tensor (u\cdot w_j) \in N$ for all PBW monomials $u$.
So $L\tensor M \in \mathcal O$.


*Proof of e:*
Since $v\in M$is a sum of weight vectors, wlog we can assume $v \in M_\lambda$ is a weight vector (where $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$).
For any central element $z\in Z(\lieg)$, we can compute $h\cdot(z\cdot v) = z \cdot (h\cdot v) = z \cdot \lambda(h) v = \lambda(h)z \cdot v$. 
Thus $z\cdot v\in M_\lambda$.
By (4), we know that $\dim M_\lambda < \infty$, so $\dim \spanof Z(\lieg) \cdot v < \infty$ as well.

*Proof of f:*
By 5, $M$ is generated by a finite dimensional $U(\mathfrak b)$ submodule $N$.
Since we have a triangular decomposition $U(\lieg) = U(\lien^-) U(\mathfrak b)$, there is a basis of weight vectors for $N$ that generates $M$ as a $U(\lien^_)$ module.

## Highest Weight Modules

Definition:
A maximal vector $v^+ \in M \in \mathcal O$ is a nonzero vector such that $\lien \cdot v^+ = 0$.

Note: By 2 and 3, every nonzero $M\in \mathcal O$ has a maximal vector.

Definition:
A highest weight module $M$ of highest weight $\lambda$ is a module generated by a maximal vector of weight $\lambda$, i.e. 
$M = U(\lieg) v^+ = U(\lien^-) U(\lieh) U(\lien) v^+ = U(\lien^-) v^+$.

Theorem:
Let $M = U(\lien^-)v^+$ be a highest weight module, where $v^+ \in M_\lambda$.
Fix $\Phi^+ = \theset{\beta_1, \cdots, \beta_n}$ with root vectors $y_i \in \lieg_{\beta_i}$.

a. $M$ is the $\CC\dash$span of PBW monomials $\generators{ y_1^{t_1} \cdots y_m^{t_m}}$ of weight $\lambda - \sum t_i \beta_i$.
  Thus $M$ is a module.
b. All weights $\mu$ of $M$ satisfy $\mu \leq \lambda$
c. $\dim M_\mu < \infty$ for all $\mu \in T(M)$, and $\dim M_\lambda = 1$.
  In particular, property (3) holds and $M \in \mathcal O$.
d. Every nonzero quotient of $M$ is a highest-weight module of highest weight $\lambda$.
e. Every submodule of $M$ is a weight module, and any submodule generated by a maximal vector with $\mu < \lambda$ is proper.
  If $M$ is semisimple, then the set of maximal weight vectors equals $\CC\units v^+$.
f. $M$ has a unique maximal submodule $N$ and a unique simple quotient $L$, thus $M$ is indecomposable.
g. All simple highest weight modules of highest weight $\lambda$ are isomorphic.
  For such $M$, $\dim \end(M) = 1$. (Category $\mathcal O$ version of Schur's Lemma, generalizes to infinite dimensional case)






