# Friday January 10th

Let $\lieg$ be a finite dimensional semisimple lie algebra over $\CC$.

Recall that this means is has no (? proper solvable ideals ?).

A more useful characterizatiion is that $\kappa \lieg\tensor \lieg \to \lieg$ is a *non-degenerate* symmetric (associative) bilinear form.

The running example we'll use is $\lieg = \liesl(n, \CC)$, the trace zero $n\times n$ matrices.

Let $\lieh$ be a maximal toral subalgebra, where $x\in\lieg$ is *toral* if $x$ is semisimple, i.e. $\ad x$ is semisimple (i.e. diagonalizable).

*Example:*
$\lieh$ is the diagonal matrices in $\liegsl(n, \CC)$.

**Fact:**
$\lieh$ is abelian, so $\ad \lieh$ consists of commuting semisimple elements, which (theorem from linear algebra) can be simultaneously diagonalized.

This leads to the root space decomposition,

\begin{align*}
\lieg = \lieh \oplus \bigoplus_{\alpha\in \Phi} \lieg_\alpha
.\end{align*}

where $\lieg_\alpha = \theset{x\in \lieg \suchthat [h x] = \alpha(h) x \forall h\in \lieh}$ where $\alpha \in \lieh\dual$ is a linear functional.

Here $\lieh = C_\lieg(\lieh)$, so $[h x] = 0$ corresponds to zero eigenvalues, and (fact) it turns out that $\lieh$ is its own centralizer.

We then obtain a set of roots of $\lieh, \lieg$ given by $\Phi = \theset{\alpha\in\lieh\dual \suchthat \alpha\neq 0, \lieg_\alpha \neq \theset{0}}$.

*Example:*
$\lieg_\alpha = \CC E_{ij}$ for some $i\neq j$, the matrix with a 1 in the $i,j$ position and zero elsewhere.

Fact:

The restriction $\restrictionof{\kappa}{\lieh}$ is nondegenerate, so we can identify $\lieh, \lieh\dual$ via $\kappa$ (can always do this with vector spaces with a nondegenerate bilinear form), where $\kappa$ maps to another bilinear form $(\wait, \wait)$.


\begin{align*}
\lieh\dual \ni \lambda \iff t_\lambda \in \lieh \\
\lambda(h) = \kappa(t_\lambda, h) \quad\text{where } (\lambda, \mu) = \kappa(t_\lambda, t_\mu)
.\end{align*}

## Facts About $\Phi$ and Root Spaces

Let $\alpha, \beta \in \Phi$ be roots.

1. $\phi$ spans $\lieh\dual$ and does not contain zero.
2. If $\alpha \in \Phi$ then $-\alpha \in \Phi$, but no other scalar multiple of $\alpha$ is in $\Phi$.
  > - $\dim \lieg_\alpha = 1$.
  > - If $0 \neq x_\alpha \in \lieg_\alpha$ then there exists a unique $y_\alpha \in \lieg_{-\alpha}$ such that $x_\alpha, y_\alpha, h_\alpha \definedas [x_\alpha, y_\alpha]$ spans a 3-dimensional subalgebra in $\liesl_2$, given by $x_\alpha = [0,1; 0,0], y_\alpha = [0,0; 1,0], h_\alpha = [1,0; 0,-1]$.
  > - Under the correspondence $\lieh \iff \lieh\dual$ induced by $\kappa$, $h_\alpha \iff \alpha\dual \definedas \frac{2\alpha}{(\alpha, \alpha)}$.
      Thus for all $\lambda \in\lieh\dual$, $\lambda(h_\alpha) = (\lambda, \alpha\dual) = \frac{2(\lambda, \alpha)}{(\alpha, \alpha)}$.
  > - If $\alpha + \beta \neq 0$, then $\kappa(g_\alpha, g_\beta) = 0$.

3.$(\beta, \alpha\dual) \in \ZZ$
4. $S_\alpha(\beta) \definedas \beta - (\beta, \alpha\dual)\alpha \in \Phi$.
  > If $\alpha + \beta \in \Phi$, then $[\lieg_\alpha \lieg_\beta] = \lieg_{\alpha+\beta}$.
  > Example: If $\alpha = E_{ij}, \beta = E_{jk}$ where $k\neq i$, then $[E_{ij}, E_{jk}]= E_{ik}$.





