# Friday January 24th

A standard theorem about classifying simple modules in category $\OO$:

Theorem:
Every simple module in $\OO$ is isomorphic to $L(\lambda)$ for some $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, and is determined uniquely up to isomorphism by its highest weight.
Moreover, $\dim \hom_\OO(L(\mu), L(\lambda)) = \delta_{\lambda \mu}$.


Proof:
Let $L \in \OO$ be irreducible.
As observed in 1.2, $L$ has a maximal vector $v^+$ of some weight $\lambda$.

> Recall: can increase weights and reach a maximal in a finite number of steps.

Since $L$ is irreducible, $L$ is generated by that weight vector, i.e. $L U(\lieg) \cdot v^+$, so $L$ must be a highest weight module.

> Standard argument: use triangular decomposition.

By the universal property, $L$ is a quotient of $M(\lambda)$.
But this means $L \cong L(\lambda)$, the unique irreducible quotient of $M(\lambda)$.

By Theorem 1.2 part g (see last Friday), $\dim \end_\OO(L(\lambda)) = 1$ and $\hom_\OO(L(\mu), L(\lamba)) = 0$ since both entries are irreducible.

$\qed$

Proof of Theorem 1.2 f:

Statement:
A highest weight module $M$ is indecomposable, i.e. can't be written as a direct sum of two nontrivial proper submodules.

Suppose $M = M_1 \oplus M_2$ where $M$ is a highest weight module of highest weight $\lambda$.
Category $\OO$ is closed under submodules, so $M_i$ are weight modules and have weight-space decompositions.
But $M_\lambda$ is 1-dimensional (triangular decomposition, only $\CC$ acts), and thus $M_\lambda \subset M_1$.
Since $M_\lambda$ is a highest weight module, it generates the entire module, so $M \subset M_1$.
The reverse holds as well, so $M = M_1$ and this forces $M_2 = 0$.

## 1.4: Maximal Vectors in Verma Modules

> 1.5: Examples in the case $\liesl(2)$, over $\CC$ as usual.

First, some review from lie algebras.

Let $\lieg$ be any lie algebra, and take $u, v \in U(\lieg)$.
Recall that we have the formula $uv = [uv] + vu$, where we use the definition $[uv] = uv - vu$.

Let $x, y_1, y_2$ be in $\lieg$, what is $[x, y_1 y_2]$?
Use the fact that $\ad x (y_1, y_2)$ acts as a derivation, and so $[x, y_1 y_2] = [x y_1]y_2 + y_1[x y_2]$, which is a bracket entirely in the Lie algebra.
This extends to an action on $U(\lieg)$ by the product rule.

Recall that $\liesl(2)$ is spanned by $y =[0,0; 1,0], h = [1,0; 0, -1], x = [0,1; 0,0]$, where each basis vector spans $\lien^-, \lieh, \lien$ respectively.
Then $[x y] = h, [h x] = 2x, [h y] = -2y$.
