# Friday February 28th

Recall that $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$ is *dominant* iff for all $\alpha \in \Phi^+$, we have $(\lambda + \rho, \alpha\dual) \not\in\ZZ^{<0}$.
Equivalently, as in Proposition 3.5c, $\lambda$ is maximal in its $W_{[\lambda]}\cdot$ orbit.

## Constructing Projectives 

Proposition
:   a. If $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$ is dominant, then $M(\lambda)$ is projective in $\OO$.
  
    b. If $P\in \OO$ is projective and $\dim L < \infty$< then $P \tensor_\CC L$ is projective.


Proof
:   a. We want to find a $\psi$ making this diagram commute:i

      \begin{tikzcd}
                          &  & v^+ \in M(\lambda) \arrow[dd, "\phi"] \arrow[lldd, "\psi", dashed] &  &   \\
                          &  &                                                                    &  &   \\
      M \arrow[rr, "\pi"] &  & p(v^+) \in N \arrow[rr]                                            &  & 0
      \end{tikzcd}

      Assume $\phi \neq 0$.
      Since $M(\lambda) \in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$, we have $\phi(M(\lambda)) \subset N^{\chi_\lambda}$.
      WLOG, we can assume $M, N \in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$, and if $v^+$ is maximal, $p(v^+)$ is maximal.
      By surjectivity of $\pi$, there exists a $v\in M$ such that $v \mapsto p(v^+)$.
      Then $M \supset U(\lien) v$ is finite dimensional, so it contains a maximal vector whose weight is linked to $\lambda$ since $M\in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$.

      But since $\lambda$ is dominant, there is no such weight greater than $\lambda$, so $v$ itself must be this maximal vector.
      Then by the universal property of $M(\lambda)$, there is a map $\psi: M(\lambda) \to M$ where $v^+ \mapsto v$ making the diagram commute.

      > Note nice property: Vermas are projective iff maximal in orbit.

    b. We want to show $F = \hom_\OO(P\tensor L, \wait)$ is exact.
      But this is isomorphic to $\hom_\OO(P, \hom_\CC(L, \wait)) \cong \hom_\OO(P, L\dual \tensor_\CC \wait)$.
      Thus $F$ is the composition of two exact functors: first do $L\dual \tensor_\CC \wait$, which is exact since $\CC$ is a field, and $\hom_\OO(P,\wait)$ is exact since $P$ is projective.

Example
: Let $M(-\rho)$ be the Verma of highest weight $\rho$.
  This is irreducible because $-\rho$ is antidominant, and projective since $-\rho$ is dominant.
  In fact $W\cdot(-\rho) = \theset{-\rho}$ by a calculation.
  Thus $L(-\rho) = M(-\rho) = P(-\rho) = M(-\rho)\dual$, so all 4 members of the highest weight category here are equal.
  
  > By convention, there is notation $M(-\rho) = \Delta(-\rho)$ and $M(-\rho)\dual = \nabla(-\rho)$.

  Note that we always have $\ext_0(L(-\rho), L(-\rho)) = 0$, and every $\OO_{\chi_{-\rho}} \in M$ is equal to $\bigoplus L(-\rho)^{\oplus n}$.
  


  
