Note:
Try problems 1.1 and 1.3*.

Category $\mathcal O$:
We have finite dimensional, semisimple modules over $\CC$ with triangular decompositions.

If $M$ is any $U(\lieg)$ module than a $v^+ \in M_\lambda$ a weight vector (so $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$) is primitive iff $\lien \cdot v^+ = 0$.
Note: it doesn't have to be of maximal weight.
$M$ is a highest weight module of highest weight $\lambda$ iff it's generated over $U(\lieg)$ as an associative algebra by a maximal vector $v^+$ of weight $\lambda$.
Then $M = U(\lieg) \cdot v^+$.

See structure of highest weight modules, and irreducibility.

Corollary:
If $0 \neq M\in\mathcal O$, then $M$ has a finite filtration with quotients highest weight modules, i.e. $M_0 \subset M_1 \subset \cdots \subset M_n = M$ with $M_i/M_{i-1}$ highest weight modules.
Note that the quotients are not necessarily simple, so this isn't a composition series, although we'll show such a series exists later.

Theorem:
Let $V$ be the $\lien$ submodule of $M$ generated by a finite set of weight vectors which generate $M$ as a $U(\lieg)$ module.
I.e. take the finite set of weight vectors and act on them by $U(\lien)$.
Then $\dim_\CC V < \infty$ since $M$ is locally $\lien\dash$finite.

Proof:
Induction on $n = \dim V$.
If $n=1$, $M$ itself is a highest weight module.

> Note that $\lien$ increases weights.

For $n > 1$, choose a weight vector $v_1 \in V$ of weight $\lambda$ which is maximal among all weights of $V$.
Set $M_1 \definedas U(\lieg) v_1$; this is a highest weight submodule of $M$ of highest weight $\lambda$.
($\lien$ has to kill v_1, otherwise it increases weight and $v_1$ wouldn't be maximal.)

Let $\bar M = M/M_1 \in \mathcal O$, this is generated by the image of $\bar V$ of $V$ and thus $\dim \bar V < \dim V$.
By the IH, $\bar M$ has the desired filtration, say $0 \subset \bar M_2 \subset \bar M_{n-1} \subset \bar M_n = \bar M$. 
Let $\pi: M \to M/M_1$, then just take the preimages $\pi\inv(\bar M_i)$ to be the filtration on $M$.

> Note: by isomorphism theorems, the quotients in the series for $M$ are isomorphic to the quotients for $\bar M$.

# Verma and Simple Modules

Constructing *universal* highest weight modules using "algebraic induction".
Start with a nice subalgebra of $\lieg$ then "induce" via $\tensor$ to a module for $\lieg$.

Recall $\lieg = \lien^- \oplus \lieh \oplus \lien$, here $\lieh \oplus \lien$ is the Borel subalgebra $\lieb$, and $\lien$ corresponds to a fixed choice of positive roots in $\Phi^+$ with basis $\Delta$.
Then $U(\lieg) = U(\lien^-) \tensor_\CC U(\lieb)$.
Given any $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, let $\CC_\lambda$ be the 1-dimensional $\lieh\dash$module (i.e. 1-dimensional $\CC\dash$vector space)on which $\lieh$ acts by $\lambda$.
Let $\theset{1}$ be the basis for $\CC$, so $h \cdot 1 = \lambda(h)1$ for all $h\in \lieh$.
Then there is a map $\lieb \to \lieb / \lien \cong \lieh$, so make $C_\lambda$ a $\lieb\dash$module via this map.
This "inflate" $C_\lambda$ into a 1-dimensional $\lieb\dash$module.

Note that $\lieh$ is solvable, and by Lie's Theorem, every finite dimensional irreducible $\lieb\dash$module is of the form $\CC_\lambda$ for some $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$.

**Definition:**
$M(\lambda) = U(\lieg) \tensor_{U(\lieb)} \CC_\lambda \definedas \ind_\lieb^\lieg \CC_\lambda$ is the *Verma module of highest weight $\lambda$*.
This process is called algebraic/tensor induction.
This is a $U(\lieg)$ module via left multiplication, i.e. acting on the first tensor factor.

Since $U(\lieg) \cong U(\lien^-) \tensor_\CC U(\lieh)$, we have $M(\lambda) \cong U(\lien^-) \tensor_\CC \CC_\lambda$, but at what level of structure?

- As a vector space (clear)
- As a $\lien^-\dash$module via left multiplication
- As a $\lieh^-\dash$module via the $\tensor$ action.

In particular, $M(\lamba)$ is a *free* $U(\lien^-)\dash$module of rank 1.

> Note: this always happens when tensoring with a vector space?

Consider $v^+ \definedas 1\tensor 1 \in M(\lambda)$ (note that $U(\lien^-)$ is not homogeneous, so not graded, but does have a filtration).
