# Wednesday April 22nd

For $p\in \QQ[x]$, we'll denote $p[i]$ the $i$th coefficient.

For $M\in \OO$ or any module of finite length, we define its radical series: $\rad^0 M = M, \rad^{i+1} M = \rad(\rad^i M)$.
Note that the layers/subquotients are semisimple.

Dually, $\soc M$ is the largest semisimple submodules of $M$, and iterating this yield the *socle series*.
Denote $\soc_i M \defubedas \soc^{i+1} M / \soc^i M$ the $i$th socle layer.
The corresponding layers are the same as in the radical filtration, just with reversed indexing.


For convenience, set $Q_{x, w} = P_{w_0 w, w_0 x}(q)$ the "inverse" KL polynomial.
Recall that a consequence of the KL conjecture is that $[M_w] = \sum_{x\leq w} Q_{x, w}(1) [L_x]$

The following theorem follows from the Jahntzen conjecture

Theorem
:   \hfill

    a. $Q_{x, w}[i] = [ \rad_{\ell(xw) - 2i} M_w : L_x] = [\soc_{\ell(x) + 2i} M_w: L_x]$ (note that Humphreys adds $+1$ here due to indexing)
    b. If $x < w$, then $\dim \ext^1 (L_x, L_w) = \mu(x, w)$.


That concludes the KL theory.

## Tilting Modules (Ch. 11)

The Lusztig conjecture is an analog of the KL conjecture for representations of algebraic groups in characteristic $p> 0$.
It gives the characters of simple modules in terms of characters of known "standard" modules. for $p  > h$ and the formulas are independent of $p$.

> Holy grail: characters of simple modules!

? showed that that Lusztig character formula is correct for $p \gg 0$ but the bounds are very large.
In 2016, Geordie Williamson found counterexamples to this conjecture for fairly large $p$.

Most recent work, suggests that more uniform formulas can be obtained using another family of indecomposable representations, the tiling modules.

Definition 
:   $M\in \OO$ is a *tilting module* if both $M, M\dual$ have standard filtrations (quotients are Vermas).
    Equivalently, adapts to settings in which there are *standard* and *co-standard* modules: $M$ is a tiling module iff $M$ has a standard filtration (for $\OO$, sections are Verma modules) and a costandard filtration (in $\OO$, sections are duals of Verma modules).

Note that a self-dual modules with a standard filtration is automatically tilting.
