# Wednesday, February 24

Last time:
\[
\chi(C, L) 
= h^0(C, L) - h^1(C, L) 
= h^0(C, L) - h^0(C, L ^{-1} \tensor K_C) 
= \deg L + 1 -g
,\]
which is determined by purely topological information.
We can generalize this to arbitrary ranks of the bundle and arbitrary dimensions of manifold:


:::{.theorem title="Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch (HRR) Formula"}
Let $X$ be a compact complex manifold and let \( \bundle{E} \to X \) be a holomorphic vector bundle.
Then
\[
\chi( \bundle{E} ) = \int_C \ch( \bundle{E} ) \td(X)
.\]
The constituents here: 

- The **Chern character**, summed over $R$ the *Chern roots*, which is in mixed cohomological degree.
\[
\ch( \bundle{E} ) \da \sum_{x_i \in R} e^{x_i} = \ch_0( \bundle{E} ) + \ch_1( \bundle{E} ) + \cdots, \ch_i( \bundle{E} ) \in H^{2i}(X; \QQ)
.\]

- The **Todd class**, defined as
\[
\td( F) \da \prod_{x_i \in R} {x_i \over 1 - e^{-x_i} }
\]
  where $\td(X) \da \td(TX)$ is viewed as a complex vector bundle, which is again in mixed cohomological degree.



:::


:::{.remark}
Note that integrating over cohomology classes in mixed degree is just equal to the integral over the top degree terms.
Applying this to $X = C$ a curve and \( \bundle{E} \da \OO \), we obtain
\[
\chi(C, \OO) 
= \int_C \ch( \OO) \td(C)
.\]

We have 

- $\ch(\OO) = e^{c_1(\OO)} = e^0 = 1$

- $\td(C) \da \td(TC) = c_1(TC) / (1- e^{ - c_1(TC) } )$, whose Taylor coefficients are the Bernoulli numbers.
  We can expand $x/(1 -e^{-x}) = 1 + (x/2) + (x^2/12) - x^4(720) + \cdots$, and since terms above degree 2 vanish, we have
  \[
  \cdots = \int_C 1 + (1 + {c_1(TC) \over 2} ) 
  &= \int_C {c_1(TC) \over 2 }
  &= {1\over 2} \chi_\Top(C) && \text{Chern-Gauss-Bonnet} \\
  &= {2-2g \over 2} \\
  &= 1-g
  .\]

We thus obtain
\[
\chi(C, L) 
&= \int_C \ch(L) \td(C) \\
&= \int_C (1 + c_1(L) ) (1 + {c_1(L) \over 2})\\
&= \int_C c_1(L) + {c_1(TC) \over 2} \\
&= \deg L + 1-g
.\]

:::


:::{.remark}
Note that this is a better definition of genus than the previous one, which was just the correction term in Riemann-Roch.
Here we can define it as $g \da h^1/2$.
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
Try to state and prove a Riemann-Roch formula for vector bundles on curves.
:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $S$ be a compact complex surface, i.e. $S\in \Mfd_\CC^2$.
An example might be $C\cross D$ for $C,D$ two complex curves, or $\CP^2$.
Let $L\to S$ be a holomorphic vector bundle.
Then
\[
\chi(L) = \chi(\OO_S) + {1\over 2} \qty{ L^2 - L \cdot K}
.\]
Note that $L^2 \da \int_S c_1(L) c_1(L)$ is just shorthand for taking the intersection of $L$ with itself.
Recall that $K \da \Omega_S^2$ is the space of holomorphic top forms.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $x_1, x_2$ be the Chern roots of $TS$.
By HRR, we have 
\[
\chi(L) 
&= \int_S \ch(L) \td(S) \\
&= \int_S \qty{ 1 + c_1(L) + {c_1(L)^2 \over 2!} } \qty{ {x_1 \over 1 - e^{-x_1} } {x_2 \over 1-e^{-x_2}} }
&= \int_S \qty{ 1 + c_1(L) + {c_1(L)^2 \over 2!} } \qty{1 + {x_1 \over 2} + {x_1^2 \over 12} }\qty{ 1 + {x_2 \over 2} + {x_2^2\over 12}}
.\]

:::







