# Friday, April 09


:::{.remark}
Recall that line bundles on $\CP^n$ were in bijection with $\ZZ$, where send $d$ to a bundle $\OO(d) \da \OO_{\CP^N}(d)$.
We produced the tautological line bundle $\OO(-1)$ whose fiber over $\vector x \subseteq \CP^n$ is the line in $\CC^n$ spanned by its coordinates. 
We have $\OO(-1)\dual \da \OO(1)$, and $\OO(n)\da \OO(1)^{\otimes n}$.
Alternatively, it was characterized in terms of homogeneous functions, where the fiber $\OO(n)_{\vector x}$ are the linear functions $L$ on lines $\ts{\lambda \vector x} \to \CC$ such that $L(\lambda p) = \lambda^n L(p)$.
Noting that these are linear functions, such $L$ form a 1-dimensional $\CC\dash$vector space.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
The classic example is $x_0 \in \OO(1)_{\vector x}$ since $x_0( \lambda p) = \lambda x_0 (p)$.
Similarly, $x_0^2 + x_1 x_2 \in \OO(2)_{\vector x}$ since 
\[
x_0^2 + x_1 x_2 (\lambda p) = \lambda^2 (x_0^2 + x_1 x_2(p))
.\]
:::


:::{.remark}
Note that the global sections were given by $\Gamma^0(\PP^n, \OO(d)) = H^0(\PP^n; \OO(d))$ was the span of degree $d$ monomials in $x_0, \cdots, x_n$.
For example $x_0^2 + x_1 x_2$ is a well-defined element of $\OO(2)_p$ varies holomorphically with $p$.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{45pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-04-09_14-11.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}


:::




:::{.example title="?"}
For a K3 surface, consider $S = \ts{ \sum_{i=0}^4 x_i^4 = 0 } \subset \CP^3$.
By the adjunction formula, $K_S = \ro{\qty{ K_{\CP^3} \tensor \OO_{\CP^3}(S) }}{S}$.
Note that if $s\in H^0(\mathcal{L})$, we can recover $\OO(\div S) = \mathcal{L}$. 
Moreover, $K_{\CP^3} = \OO(-4)$ and $\OO_{\CP^3}(S) = \OO(4)$ since we can view the formula as a function on the tautological line, which yields a section.
So we get $K_S = \OO(-4) \tensor \OO(4) = \OO(0) = \OO$, i.e. these yield actual functions on $\CP^n$ since they're products of functions that scale by $\lambda^{-4}$ and functions that scale by $\lambda^4$.
We're using the fact that $\OO_{\vector p = [x_0: \cdots : x_n]}$ are functions $L$ such that $L(\lambda p) = \lambda^0 L(p) = L(p)$, which yields a well-defined function on $\CP^n$.
So quartics in $\PP^3$ have trivial canonical bundle, i.e. $K_S = \OO_S$ for $S = V(x_0^4 + x_1^4 + x_2^4 + x_3^4)$.
:::


:::{.remark}
We know that $H^o(S, K_S)$ are the globally holomorphic 2-forms on $S$, and here this is isomorphic to $H^0(S, \OO_S) = \CC \Omega_S$ for some single holomorphic 2-form.
Moreover $\div (\Omega_S) = 0$ since $\OO( \div ( \Omega_S)) = K_S = \OO_S$.
So these are the analogs of elliptic curves in dimension 2, since for example $E \da \CC/ \Lambda$ has a nonvanishing section $\dz \in H^0(E, K_E)$, and we can write $E = V(f)$ for $f$ a cubic in $\PP^3$, and we computed the genus of cubics.
Moreover, every genus 1 curve is $\CC$ mod a lattice.
:::


:::{.remark}
Recall an exercise from the notes: computing the Hodge diamond of a genus 5 curve.
We'll compute the diamond for a K3 surface.
:::



