# Wednesday, April 28


:::{.remark}
Last time: we defined $\Pin(n) \subseteq \Cl(\RR^n)$ which was generated by $S^1(\RR^n)$.
These were units because $v^2 = -\norm{v}^2 = -1$, so $v\inv = -v$, and formed a group contained in $\Cl(\RR^n)\units$.
There is a decomposition $\Cl(V) = \Cl_0(V) \oplus \Cl_1(V)$ with a $\ZZ/2\dash$grading, and we defined 
\[
\Spin(V) \da \Pin(V) \intersect \Cl_0(V) = \gens{ vw \st v,w\in S^1(\RR^n) } 
.\]
There is a map
\[
\Pin(n) &\surjects O(n) \\
v & \mapsto (u\mapsto vuv\inv) = -R_{v^\perp}
,\]
which preserves $V^{\tensor 1} \subset \Cl(V)$, and was reflection about the hyperplane $v^\perp$.
There is also a SES
\[
0 \to \ZZ/2 \to \Spin(n) \mapsvia{\pi}  \SO(n) \to 0
,\]
where we used the fact that $\ker \pi \subset Z\Cl(\RR^n)$.
It turns out that $\Spin(n) = \univcover{ \SO(n) }$, using that $\pi_1( \SO(n), \pt) = \ZZ/2$ and checking that $\pm 1\in \Spin(n)$, yielding a nontrivial kernel.
:::


:::{.remark}
This is local, at a single vector space, so we'll now try to globalise this to the tangent space of a manifold.
:::


:::{.definition title="?"}
Let $(V, g)$ be an oriented smooth Riemannian manifold where $g$ is a metric on $TX$.
Define the **Clifford bundle** of $X$ by 
\[
\Cl(X) \da \Cl(T\dual X, g\dual)
,\]
where we've used the dual metric $g\dual$ on the cotangent bundle.
:::


:::{.remark}
We showed that $\gr \Cl(\RR^n) = \Extalg \RR^n$, and so there is a bundle isomorphism 
\[
\Cl(X) \mapsvia{\sim} \Extalg^* T^\dual X
,\]
but the ring structure is different.
On the right, we have a way of multiplying sections, namely \( \omega_1 \wedge \omega_2 \), but on the left we have the Clifford multiplication \( \alpha_1 \cdot \alpha_2 \).
Note that \( \omega^{\wedge 2} = 0 \), but \( \alpha^{\cdot 2} \in \RR \) is some scalar.
We define \( \omega\cdot \omega= g^*( \omega, \omega) \), so we use the metric fiberwise to define a Clifford multiplication.
:::


:::{.definition title="The principal oriented frame bundle"}
Given an oriented bundle with a metric, there is a principal $\SO(n)$ bundle $P \da \OFrame$, the space of orthogonal oriented frames.
:::


:::{.remark}
This is principal since any two elements are related by a unique element of $\SO(n)$.
Recall that we had an *associated bundle* construction, so taking the standard representation $\rho: \SO(n) \to (\RR^n, g)$ where elements act by their transformations (?), there is an oriented bundle $P \fiberprod_{\rho} \RR^n$.
If the bundle is $TX$ with a metric $g$, this yields a distinguished $\SO(n)$ bundle $P\to X$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Spin Structures"}
A **spin structure** is a lift $\tilde P$ of $P$ to a principal $\Spin(n)$ bundle.
:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
$X$ admits a spin structure iff the second Stiefel--Whitney class $w_2(X) = 0$ in $H^2(X; \ZZ/2)$.
If $w_2(X) = 0$, then the spin structures are torsors over $H^1(X; \ZZ/2)$.
:::


:::{.remark}
Recall that a $G\dash$torsor is a set with a free transitive of $G$.
For example, the fibers of a principal bundle are torsors.
Given any two torsors, we can compare them using elements of $G$, but there is no distinguished element.
For example, $\AA_n$ is a torsor over the vector space $k^n$.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
Consider transitions for $P\to X$:
\[
t_{ij}: U_i \intersect U_j \to \SO(n) \\
,\]
where $t_{ij} = t\inv_{ji}$ and the cocycle condition $t_{ij} t_{jk} t_{ki} = 1$ is satisfied.

:::










