---
title: Problem Set 2
---

# Humphreys 1.5

Proposition:
Let $\lieg = \liesl(2, \CC)$ and $M(\lambda), M(\mu)$ Verma modules.
Then $M(\lambda) \tensor M(\mu)$ can not lie in $\OO$.


Useful facts:

- For any $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, $\CC_\lambda$ is a 1-dimensional $\lieb\dash$bimodule with a trivial $\lien\dash$action.
- $M(\lambda) = \ind_\lieb^\lieg \CC_\lambda = U(\lieg)\tensor_{U(\lieb)} \CC_\lambda$ as a left $U(\lieg)\dash$module.
- $M(\lambda) = U(\lien^-) \tensor \CC_\lambda$ as a left $U(\lien^-)\dash$module.
- $M(\lambda)$ is generated as a $U(\lieg)\dash$module by the maximal vector $v^+ = 1\tensor 1$.
- The set of weights of $M(\lambda)$ is $\lambda - \Gamma$ where $\Gamma$ is the semigroup in $\Lambda_r$ generated by $\Phi^+$.
- $M(\lambda)$ has weights $\lambda, \lambda-2, \lambda-4,\cdots$ each with multiplicity 1.

Questions

- What is the tensor product over? Guess: $\tensor_\CC$.
- MSE: the product is no longer finitely generated.
  -  Consider dimensions of weight spaces -- eventually constant.
  -  If $\wt{v} = \lambda$ and $\wt(u) = \mu$, then $\wt(u\tensor v) = \lambda + \mu$.
  -  Consider a weight space $N_\gamma$ of $M$. This must have the form $\bigoplus_{a + b = \gamma} M_a \tensor_\CC M_b$.
    -  Example: consider $\lambda = \mu = 0$. Then $M = M(0) \tensor M(0)$ and $N_{-2m}$ has dimension $m+1$ for every $m\in \ZZ^+$.

**Solution:**
Let $M(\lambda), M(\mu)$ be 

# Humphreys 1.9

**Proposition:**
Let $\psi: Z(\lieg) \to S(\lieh)$ be the Harish-Chandra homomorphism.
Then $\psi$ is independent of the choice of a simple system in $\Phi$.

> Hint: any simple system has the form $w\Delta$ for some $w\in W$.

Useful facts:

- 
