# 2021-04-03

## 16:28

> The connections between FGLs and homotopy are key. Read Quillen's paper, J.F. Adams' blue book, Ravenel, etc. Ravenel has some slides on Quillen's work (good entry pt). If you really want to go in depth, I enjoyed learning from Hazewinkel's book "Formal Groups and Applications".

## 16:30

### Setting Goals

- Don't set goals to be outcome-dependent.
  Set input goals!
  E.g. "Write a book that I'm proud of and I like."

- Don't set goals that depend on factors outside of your control -- hitting some metric, getting a specific award, etc.

- Check in with your emotional state.
  It's not always healthy to push through not feeling like doing something.
  This can be useful if it's a matter of discipline, i.e. if pushing through is actually serving you well.
  But it can also serve you poorly in the long run by exacerbating poor mental state or leading to burnout.

- It's okay to take a break.
  Check in to ask yourself if it's coming from a place of self-care or instead procrastination.

- Choose to be satisfied!
  The story you tell yourself after the fact does not change the reality of the past.
  Does it serve you well to say "I didn't do enough?"
  It's okay to choose to be satisfied.

### Studying

- Have a mental model is the key priority, then go to rote memorization only when absolutely necessary.
  Remember because you understand the subject!

- Use active recall for the *learning* process -- actively test yourself **as** you're reading.

- See book: "Make It Stick"

- The evidence is that popular techniques have low utility: rereading, highlighting, summarizing, taking notes.

- Summarizing and taking notes: low utility in general.
  This has some marginal utility if you're particularly skilled or trained in summarizing effectively.
  So not very effective, but do it if it brings you joy!

- Active recall and practice testing: high utility!
  Not very time-intensive, doesn't require special skills/training.

- Do practice testing **during each study session**.
  Studies show 10-15% improvement.
  Try to ask yourself inference questions.
