# Friday, July 02

Reference: <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1103.4674.pdf>

- $\bar\mgn$ denotes the DM compactification.

- Goal: look at moduli spaces of hyperbolic surfaces and equip it with a symplectic structure using the Weil-Petersson form.
  - Interesting because polynomials involving volumes compute intersection numbers on $\mgn$.

- Curves with marked points = punctured Riemann surfaces = punctured surfaces with complete constant curvature Riemannian metrics.
  Almost all admit a hyperbolic metric.

- $\mgn(\vector L)$: moduli of hyperbolic surfaces with $n$ geodesic boundary components with lengths prescribed by $L_i$, up to boundary-label-preserving isometries.

- Construct as quotient of $\tgn$ to get an orbifold structure, Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates, and the Weil-Petersson symplectic form $\omega$, making $\mgn(\vector L)$ symplectic.


:::{.definition title="Weil-Petersson volume"}
\[
V_{g, n}(\mathbf{L})=\int_{\mathcal{M}_{g, n}(\mathbf{L})} \frac{\omega^{3 g-3+n}}{(3 g-3+n) !}
.\]
:::


:::{.theorem title="Mirzakhani"}
Letting $\psi_i \in H^2(\bar\mgn; \QQ)$ be $\psi\dash$classes and $\kappa_1$ be the first Mumford-Morita-Miller class.
\[
V_{g, n}(\vector L) = \sum_{m + \sum a_i = 3g -3 + n}
{
\qty{2\pi^2}^m \prod L_i^{2a_i}
\over 
2^{\sum a_i } m! \prod a_i!
}
\int_{\bar\mgn} \kappa_1^m \prod \psi_i^{a_i}
.\]

:::

- Gauss-Bonnet: for $K$ the Gaussian curvature,
\[
\int_\Sigma K \dV = 2\pi \chi(\Sigma)
.\]

  - For a metric of constant curvature $K=-1$ to exist, need $\chi(\Sigma) < 0$, so $2-2g-n<0$ where $(g, n)$ are the genus and number of punctures.

- Hyperbolic surfaces: $\HH^2 / G$ for $G\leq \PSL_2(\RR)$.

- Equivalence of categories between smooth algebraic curves and compact Riemann surfaces.

- Uniformization: Every Riemannian metric on $\Sigma$ is conformally equivalent to $g$, a complete constant curvature metric.
  $g$ is unique if $\chi(\Sigma)<0$ and the curvature $K=-1$.
  So Riemann surfaces biject with hyperbolic surfaces.
    - So every conformal class of metrics contains a hyperbolic metric when $\chi(\Sigma)<0$.
    - If $\Sigma$ is complete, the punctures become hyperbolic cusps.

- $\mgn(\vector 0)$ defined as hyperbolic surfaces with $n$ labeled cusps, homeomorphic as an orbifold to $\mgn$.
