# Wednesday April 8th

Theorem (Krull Intersection, 8.39)
:   For $R$ Noetherian and $I \normal R$ a proper ideal,

    a. If there exists an $x\in \intersect_{i=1}^\infty I^n$, then $x\in xI$.
    b. Suppose either $R$ is a domain or $I \subset \mcj(R)$, then $\intersect I^n = (0)$.

Proof
:   \hfill

    a. Omitted.
    b. If $x\in \intersect I^n$, then (a) implies that there exists an $a\in I$ such that $x = xa$.
      Then $x(1-a) = 0$.
      Since $R$ is a domain and $a\neq 0$, then $1-a$ is not a zero divisor.

Exercise
: Exhibit a proper ideal $I \normal R$ Noetherian such that $\intersect_n I^n \neq (0)$.

  > Note: there is a very small ring that will work.

Exercise (Recommended, Difficult Calculus)
:   Consider $R = \theset{f:\RR\to \RR, f\in C^\infty} \subset \RR^\RR$ and $\mfm \definedas \theset{f\in R \suchthat f(0) = 0}$.

    1. Show $\mfm \normal R$ and $R/\mfm = \RR$ and thus $\mfm$ is maximal.
    2. Show $\mfm = (x)$.
    3. Show that for all $n\in \ZZ$, we have $\mfm^n = (x^n) = \theset{f \suchthat f(0) = f'(0) = \cdots - f^{n+1} = 0}$.
    4. Show that $\intersect \mfm^n = \theset{f\suchthat T_0(f) \equiv 0} \neq (0)$
    5. Show that $f\not\in f\mfm$ (so $f\neq x g$ for some other smooth $g$) therefore $R$ is not Noetherian.

> Start with a smooth function vanishing at zero, divide by $x$, define value at zero to make it continuous.
> Example: $f(x) = e^{-1/x^2}$ for $x\neq 0$ and $f(0) = 0$.


Theorem (Principal Ideal Theorem / Krull's Hauptfdealsatz)
:   For $R$ Noetherian, $x\in R\setminus R\units$, $\mfp \in \spec(R)$ *minimal over $(x)$* (to be explained).
    Then $\ht(\mfp) \leq p$, where we recall that that height is given by the number of ideals below it.
