# Friday February 14th

Let $R$ be a ring and consider $K_0(R)$.

> Measures difference between f.g. projective and free modules over $R$.

Define $(M(R), +) \definedas$ the commutative monoid of isomorphism classes of f.g. projective $R\dash$modules with addition given by direct sum, i.e. $[P] + [Q] = [P\oplus Q]$ with identity the zero modules, and $K_0(R) = G((M(R), +))$ is the group completion, which any map $M(R) \to G$ a group factors through.
Concretely, any element of $K_0(R)$ is of the form $[P] - [Q]$, where $[P_1] -[Q_1] \sim [P_2] - [Q_2]$ iff $[M] + [P_1] + [Q_2] = [M] + [P_2] + [Q_2]$ for every finitely generated projective $R\dash$ module $M$.
Note that excluding the $R$ here fails transitivity and thus doesn't yield an equivalence relation.

If $P, Q$ are finitely generated projective $R\dash$modules, then $[P] = [Q]$ iff $\exists M$ such that $P \oplus M \cong Q \oplus M$ iff there exists $N$ a finitely generated projective such that $M\oplus N \cong R^n$ for some $n$, i.e. $P \oplus R^n \cong Q\oplus R^n$.
In such a case, we say $P, Q$ are stably isomorphic.

Note that $[P] = 0$ iff $[P]$ has rank zero, or $[P] \oplus R^n \cong R^n$.
Also note that $[P] \cong [Q]$ can occur without necessarily having $P\cong Q$ as modules.

We can actually make $K_0(R)$ into a ring with $[P] \cdot [Q] \definedas [P \tensor_R Q]$.

> Note that the tensor product of two finitely-generated $R\dash$modules is still finitely generated as an $R\dash$module.

*Example:*
Let $R$ be a PID, then $M(R)$ is a commutative semiring (no additive inverses) and is equal to $(\NN, +, \cdot)$ (occurs whenever )very finitely generated projective is free).
Similarly $G(R) = (\NN, +, \cdot)$.
Since $R$ has invariant basis number, there is always an injective group morphism

\begin{align*}
(\ZZ, +) &\mapsto (K_0(R), +) \\
n &\mapsto [R^n]
.\end{align*}

> Yields no cancellation among free modules.
> We want to essentially ignore this case, so we'll mod out.

**Definition:**
The reduced $K$ group is given by $\tilde{K_0(R)} \definedas (K_0(R), +) / (\ZZ, +)$.

Note that $[P] = [G]$ in $\tilde{K_0(R)}$ iff there exist $m, n$ such that $P \oplus R^m \cong Q \oplus R^n$.
Moreover $[P] = 0$ iff $\exists m, n$ such that $P \oplus R^n \cong R^n$.
In this case we say $P$ is *stably free*.


  

