# Monday April 20th

Exercise
: If $f: R\to S$ is a ring morphism, then $f^*: \spec S \to \sec R$ is a continuous map of topological spaces.

Exercise
: Defining $R^{\text{red}} \definedas R/\mfm R$, show that $q^*: \spec R^{\text{red}} \to \spec R$ is a homeomorphism.

Exercise
: The bijection $\spec(\prod R_i) = \coprod \spec R_i$ is a canonical homeomorphism for finite (co)products.

Proposition
: For any ring, $\spec R$ is quasi-compact, i.e. every open cover has a finite subcover.

> Here, "compact" will denote quasi-compact and Hausdorff.

Proof (Sketch, Important to Check)
:   The open sets $U(f) \definedas \spec R \setminus V(f)$ are a base for the Zariski topology.
    It suffices to check that every open cover by basic open sets has a finite subcover.
    Can check that that the unit ideal is generated by finitely many elements.

Theorem
:   For any ring $R$, there is a bijection
    \begin{align*}
    \correspond{Idempotents of R} &\iff \correspond{clopen subsets of spec R} \\
    e & \mapsto U(e)
    \end{align*}

    where on the RHS we have $e(1-e) = 0 \implies V(e) = V(1-e)$.

Note that a space is connected iff the only clopen sets are trivial, thus $\spec R$ is connected iff the only idempotents of $R$ are $0, 1$.
Thus a ring is connected, i.e. it's not a nontrivial product of rings, iff its spectrum is a connected space.

Theorem
:   For a ring $R$, TFAE

    - $\dim R = 0$, so every prime ideal is maximal.
    - $\spec R$ is separated, i.e. $T1$, points are closed, i.e. for disjoint points, disjoint neighborhoods exist (note that $\maxspec R$ is always separated and quasicompact)
    - $\spec R$ is Hausdorff
    - $\spec R$ is a Boolean space (compact and totally disconnected)

Theorem (13.10, Proof Missing in Notes)
:   A ring $R$ is *Gelfand* iff every prime ideal is contained in a maximal ideal (e.g. a local ring).
    TFAE: 

    1. $R/\mcj(R)$ is Gelfand.
    2. $\maxspec R$ is compact.
    3. $\maxspec R$ is Hausdorff.

Theorem (5.9, 5.11)
:   For a topological (Hausdorff?) space $X$, define $C(X)$ to be the ring of $\PP\dash$valued functions $f$ on $X$. 
    If $X$ is compact, then there is a bijection
    \begin{align*}
    X &\mapsvia{\cong} \maxspec C(X) \\
    c &\mapsto \mfm_c = \theset{f\in C(X) \suchthat f(c) = 0 }
    .\end{align*}

Recall Kolmogorov spaces are defined as those for which distinct points never have precisely the same set of neighborhoods.

Theorem (Hocharter)
:   Let $X$ be a topological space.

    a. $X \cong_{\text{Top}} \maxspec R$ for some $R \iff X$ is quasi-compact and separated.
    b. $X \cong_{\text{Top}} \spec R \iff X = \inverselim Y_i$ where $Y_i$ is a finite Kolmogorov space.

> For fun: find where this theorem is applied in the literature!

Definition (Key)
: A topological space is *irreducible* if it is nonempty and not the union of two proper closed subspaces.

