# Friday February 28th

Recall: radicals, nilradical, and now the Jacobson radical.

Definition
: $\mcj(R) = \intersect{\mfm \in \maxspec(R)} \mfm$.
  For a noncommutative ring, instead of intersecting just two-sided ideals, need to intersect either left ideals *or* right ideals (the intersections turn out to be equivalent).

If $R$ is finite dimensional over a field, then $\mcj(R) = 0 \iff R$ is semisimple.
By Wedderburn, this happens iff $R = \prod M_{n_i}(D_i)$.

Definition
: A ring is *semiprimitive* *(or $\mcj\dash$semisimple or Jacobson-semisimple)* iff $\mcj(R) = 0$.

Proposition
: $x\in \mcj(R) \iff 1-xR \subset R\units$.

Proof
: Let $x\in \mcj(R)$ and suppose $1-xy \not\in R\units$, so $1-xy\in\mfm$ for some maximal ideal.
  But then $x\in \mfm$, so $xy \in \mfm$, so $1 = \mfm + xy \in \mfm$, a contradiction.
  
  Suppose instead that $x\not\in\mcj(R)$, so there exists some maximal such that $\generators{m, x} = R$.
  Thus for $y\in R, m\in\mfm$, we have $1 = m+xy$ so $1-xy = m \in \mfm$ and thus $1-xy \not\in R\units$.

In other words, $R\units + \mcj(R) \subset R\units$, and is the largest ideal with this property.
Thus the elements are "close to zero" in the sense that it doesn't take you outside of the unit group.

## Proposition (Commutative Algebra Analog of Euclid IX.20: Infinitely Many Primes)

Let $R$ be a domain, then recall that $p\in R^\bullet$ is irreducible iff $p\not\in R\units$ and $p=xy \implies x\in R^\units$ or $y\in R^\units$.
If $p$ is irreducible and $u\in R\units$, then $up$ is irreducible and associate to $p$, and $(up) = (p)$.

Define an *atom* to be the principal ideal generated by an irreducible element.

Define a *Fursentenberg domain* to be a domain such that $x\in R^\bullet\setminus R\units$ has an irreducible divisor.
Note that we have a chain of implication, UFD $\implies$ Noetherian = ACC $\implies$ ACC on principal ideals $\implies$ nonzero nonunits factor into irreducibles (atomic domain) $\implies$ Forsentenburg.
So this is a weak factorization condition.

Exercise
: Let $R = \mathrm{Hol}(\CC)$ be the ring of holomorphic functions, which is a domain by the identity theorem.
  Show that $R$ is semiprimitive, Furstenberg but not atomic.

Theorem (Euclidean Criterion)
:   Let $R$ be a domain, not a field, and semiprimitive.
  
    a. There exists a sequence of pairwise comaximal elements $\theset{a_n}_n^\infty$ such that $\generators{a_m, a_N} = R$ for $m\neq n$.

    b. If $R$ is Forstenburg, then there is a sequence of primitive pairwise comaximal *irreducible* elements, and thus infinitely many atoms.

Note that applying this to $R = \ZZ$, the only unit ideals are generated by $\pm 1$, and the result follows immediately.

Proof
: Exercise.

> For what class of rings does this criterion apply?

Application
: For $R$ a Noetherian domain, then by Hilbert's basis theorem $R[t]$ is Noetherian and semiprimitive.
  So by the above result, $R[t]$ is has infinitely many elements.
  Most interesting for $R = \FF_q$, since for e.g. $R=\RR$ we can consider $(x-r)$.
