# Monday February 3rd

Some module topics from Chapter 8.

## Noetherian and Artinian Modules

**Definition:**
A poset $(X, \leq)$ is said to satisfy the ACC or to be Noetherian iff there does not exist an infinite sequence (a chain) $\theset{x_n}$ with strict inequalities $x_1 < x_2 < \cdots$.
Equivalently, every weakly ascending chain $x_1 \leq x_2 \leq \cdots$ eventually stabilizes, i.e. there exists an $N$ such that $x_N = x_{N+1} = \cdots$.

**Definition:**
Similarly, a poset satisfies the DCC or is *Artinian* iff there does not exist an infinite decreasing sequence $x_1 > x_2 > \cdots$.

**Definition:**
For $(X, \leq)$, define the order dual $(X\dual, \leq)$ where $x\leq y \in X\dual \iff y\leq x \in X$.

Proposition:
$X$ is Noetherian iff $X\dual$ is Artinian.

**Lemma:**
The ACC holds iff every nonempty subset has a maximum (and similarly the DCC with minimums).

> Proof: Otherwise use AOC to pick elements $x_i$; if $x_i$ isn't the maximum then there is some $x_{i+1} > x_i$, and this yields an infinite ascending chain iff no maximum.

Let $M$ be an $R\dash$module, and define $\mathrm{Sub}_R M = \theset{(R\dash\text{submodules of } M, \leq)}$.

**Lemma:**
$M$ is Noetherian $\iff$ every submodule $N\leq M$ is finitely generated.

*Proof:*
Apply DCC.

$\qed$

**Exercise:**
Let $M' \subset M$ and $q: M \to M/M'$.
Let $N_1 \subset N_2 \subset M$ such that

- $N_1 \intersect M' = N_2 = M'$, and
- $q(N_1) = q(N_2)$.

Then $N_1 = N_2$.

**Proposition:**
If $0 \to M' \to M \to M'' \to 0$ is exact and $M$ is Noetherian (resp. Artinian) then $M', M''$ are both Noetherian (resp. Artinian).

*Proof:*
Note that $\mathrm{Sub}_R {M'}, \mathrm{Sub}_R {M''} \injects \mathrm{Sub}_{R} M$ in an order-preserving manner.
If we then have $N_1 \subset N_2 \subset \cdots$ with $N_i \leq M$ submodules of $M$, we can consider $N_n = \frac{N_n + M'}{M'}$, which is weakly increasing in $M'$. 

> Note: this is how we push forward into quotients.

Thus this chain stabilizes, so for $i, j \gg 0$ we have $N_i + M' = N_j + M'$.
So then $N_i \intersect M' = N_j \intersect M'$, and by the exercise, $N_i = N_j$ for all $i, j \gg 0$.

$\qed$

**Corollary:**
$R$ is Noetherian (resp. Artinian) iff every finitely-generated $R\dash$module is Noetherian (resp. Artinian)

*Proof:*

$\implies$:
Suppose $R$ is Noetherian.
Note that $0 \to R \to R^2 \to R \to 0$ since $R^2$ is an extension of $R$ by $R$.
Thus $R^2$ is Noetherian, and inductively $R^n$ is a Noetherian $R\dash$module.

If $M$ is a finitely-generated $R\dash$module, it is a quotient of a finitely-generated free $R\dash$module, and in particular $0\to K \to R^n \to M \to 0$ is exact.
So $M$ is Noetherian, by the previous proposition (middle of a SES Noetherian $\implies$ ends are Noetherian).

$\qed$
