 # Monday April 27th

## Normalization

Theorem (14.19)
:   A domain $R$ is integrally closed iff $R_\mfp$ is integrally closed for all $\mfp \in \spec R$ iff $R_\mfp$ is integrally closed for all $\mfm \in \maxspec R$.

> Recall that the height of a prime ideal is the supremum of lengths of chains.
> Height one corresponds to principal.

Definition
: For $R$ a Noetherian ring, $\mfp \in \spec R$ is *regular* iff $\dim_{\RR_\mfp / pR_\mfp} {\mfp R_\mfp \over \qty{\mfp R_\mfp}^2} = \ht(\mfp)$.

This corresponds to a mild nonsingularity property for varieties.

Theorem (14.21, Going Down)
: For $R\subset S$ an integral extension of domains, $R$ is integrally closed

\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
\exists \mfp_1 \ar[d, mapsto] & \mfp_2 \ar[d, mapsto] & \spec S \ar[d, mapsto] \\
\mfp_1 \ar[r, "\subset"] & \mfp_2 & \spec R
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

Theorem (14.22, Noether Normalization)
:   Let $k$ be an arbitrary field, $R$ a domain and a finitely generated $k\dash$algebra.
    Then

    a. There exists a $d\in\NN$ and algebraically independent elements $y_1, \cdots, y_d$ such that $k[y_1, \cdots, y_d] \subset R$ is a finitely generated module.

    b. $\dim R = d$ equals the transcendence degree of $ff(R) / k$.

Application: Noether normalization implies Zariski's lemma.

Remark (Separable Noether Normalization):
In the above setup, if $k$ is perfect that one can choose the $y_i$ such that $ff(R) / k(y_1, \cdots, y_d)$ is finite and *separable*.

## Invariant Theory

For $G$ a finite group and $R$ an arbitrary object of a category $\mcc$, the notion of a group action by makes sense: namely a group morphism $G \to \Aut_\mcc(R)$.

Definition
:   For a ring $R$ and a group acting by ring automorphisms, the *ring of invariants* is given by
    \begin{align*}
    R^G \definedas \theset{x\in R \suchthat gx = x \forall g\in G}
    .\end{align*}

Theorem
: $R^G \subset R$ is integral.

Proof
:   For $x\in R$, define $\Phi_x(t) \definedas \prod_{g\in G} (t - gx)$.
    We can extend the action of $G$ by acting on coefficients and acting on $t$ trivially, yielding $\Phi_x \in (R[t])^G = R^G[t]$ and thus $\Phi_x(x) = 0$.

Proposition
: If $R$ is integrally closed, so is $R^G$.

> Note that this doesn't hold with regularity!
> Here $R^G$ corresponds to "quotient varieties" in AG, which have mild "quotient singularities".

Important point: in dimension 1, normal coincides with regular.

Example
:   If $G = \theset{\pm 1}$, $R = \CC[x, y]$ and let $-1$ act by $\CC\dash$algebraic automorphisms acting trivially on $\CC$ and sending $x\mapsto -x, y\mapsto -y$.
    Then $R^G = \CC[x^2, xy, y^2] = \CC[X, Y, Z]/\gens{XZ - Y^2}$ which is a conic, and in particular an *affine quadric cone*.
    Since we started out with a UFD, which is integrally closed (and in fact regular), this is integrally closed but the maximal ideal $\gens{X, Y, Z} + (XZ - Y^2)$ is singular.
