# Monday April 6th

Last time: a characterization of Artinian rings, the Akizuki-Hopkins theorem

Theorem (Akizuki-Hopkins)
: $R$ is Artinian iff $R$ is Noetherian with Krull dimension 1, i.e. all primes are maximal.

Proposition
:   Suppose $(R, \mfm)$ is Noetherian and local.
    Then either

    1. $\mfm^n \gneq \mfm^{n+1}$ for all $n$, or
    2. $\mfm^n = (0)$ for some $n$.

    Moreover, (2) holds iff $R$ is Artinian.

Proof
:   If $\mfm^n = \mfm^{n+1}$ for some $n$, then by Nakayama $\mfm^n = (0)$.

    If $R$ is Artinian, then (1) can not hold, so (2) must hold.
    Conversely, if (2) holds, then $\mfm \in \nil R = \intersect_{\spec R} \mfp$, but this can only happen if $\spec R = \theset{\mfm}$ is precisely one ideal.
    But then every prime ideal is maximal.

Note that Artinian rings have finitely many maximal ideals.

Theorem (Primary Decomposition)
:   Let $R$ be a nonzero Artinian ring and suppose $\maxspec R = \theset{\mfm_i}^n$.
    Then $R = \prod_{i=1}^n \mfr_i$ where $\mfr_i \definedas R_{\mfm_i}$.

Note that for $R = \ZZ$ and $N = \prod_{i=1}^n p_i^{a_i}$, this recovers $Z/N\ZZ = \prod_{i=1}^n \ZZ/p_i^{a_i}\ZZ$.

Punchline: Artinian rings split as a product of local rings.
Modules over local rings are free, and thus simple, so this gives a local-to-global principle.
Moreover, every localization is a projection onto one of the factors.

Exercise
:   For $R$ Artinian, show that every $x\in R$ is either a unit or a zero divisor.
    Thus $R$ is its own total fraction ring.

Exercise
:   For a ring $R$, TFAE

    1. $R$ is semilocal (finitely many maximal ideals).
    2. $R/\mcj(R)$ is Artinian.
    3. $R/\mcj(R)$ has finitely many ideals.

Most important theorem in the course: Hilbert's basis theorem!

Theorem (Hilbert's Basis)
: If $R$ is Noetherian, then $R[t]$ is Noetherian.

Proof
:   Toward a contradiction, let $J \normal R[t]$ that is not finitely generated.
    Construct a sequence $\theset{f_n}$  and take $J_n \definedas \gens{f_1, \cdots, f_n} \subseteq J$.
    This can be done by taking $f_0 = 0$ and $f_{n+1}$ any element of $J/J_{n}$ of minimal degree.
    Note that this ensures that $\deg f_n \leq \deg f_{n-1}$.

    Set $a_n$ to be the leading coefficient of $f_n$, and let $I = \gens{\theset{a_i}}$.
    Since $R$ is Noetherian, $I$ is finitely generated, so there is some $N \in \ZZ$ such that $I = \gens{a_1, \cdots, a_N}$.

    Thus $a_{n+1} = \sum_{i=1}^N u_i a_i$ for some $u_i \in R$.
    So set $g \definedas \sum_{i=1}^N u_i f_i t^{ \deg f_{N+1} - \deg f_i }$.
    Then $g\in J_N$ and $f_N \in J/J_n$ and $f_{N+1} - g \in J\setminus J_N$.

    Now the leading term of $g$ is $\sum u_i a_i = a_{N+1}$, and since $\deg g = \deg f_{N+1}$ where $a_{N+1}$ is also the leading term of $f_{N+1}$.
    Thus $\deg(f_{N+1} - g) < \deg f_{N+1}$, contradicting minimality.
