# Wednesday January 15th

Cayley's theorem: For $G$ a group, then there is a canonical injective group homomorphism $\Phi: G \injects \mathrm{Sym}(G) \cong S_n$ for $n = \abs{G}$.
The map is given by $g \mapsto g\wait$, i.e. multiplying on the left.
Is there an analog for rings?

Take a similar map:

\begin{align*}
R \to \mathrm{End}_\ZZ(R, +) \\
r \mapsto (x \mapsto rx)
.\end{align*}

Unfortunately there is no specialization for commutative groups/rings -- $\mathrm{Sym}(G)$ for example is noncommutative when $\abs {G} \geq 2$.
Similarly, even if $R$ is commutative, $\End(R, +)$ is probably not.
As per the Grothendieck philosophy, we find that all rings are a ring of functions on something -- namely themselves, since this map is injective.

All rings are commutative here, so take $R\units = \theset{x\in R \suchthat \exists y \text{s.t.} xy = 1}$.
For $R$ a group, $R\units$ is a commutative group, so this is an interesting invariant.

> Another interesting invariant: the class group.

Notation: 
Let $R^\bullet = R\setminus{0}$.
An element $x\in R$ is a zero divisor iff there exists $y\in R^\bullet$ such that $xy = 0$.
For $x,y\in R$ we write $x\divides y$ iff $\exists z\in R$ such that $xz = y$.

$R$ is a domain iff $0$ is the only zero divisors, i.e. $xy = 0 \implies x = 0$ or $y=0$.
$(R^\bullet, \cdot)$ is a commutative monoid (group without inverses) iff $R$ is a domain.
Observe that $R$ is a field iff $R^\bullet = R\units$.

For rings $R, S$ we have the usual definition of ring homomorphism, additionally requiring $f(1) = 1$.
Note that $f(0) = 0$ follows from $f(x+y) = f(x) + f(y)$, but $f(1) = 1$ does not.
Rings have products $R_1 \cross R_2$ which is again a ring under coordinate-wise operations.
Note that there are canonical projections $\pi_i R_1 \cross R_2 \to R_i$.
