# Monday February 24th

## Divisible Modules

We know that injective implies divisible, and uniquely divisible implies injective.
Fact: quotients of divisible modules are divisible

Exercise
:   If $R$ is a domain that is not a field and $M$ is a finitely-generated divisible $R\dash$module, then $M = 0$.

Proof (of exercise)
:   Claim: for any ring $R$, any nonzero f.g. $R\dash$module $M$ has a nonzero cyclic (monogenic) quotient given by modding out by all but one of the generators.
    Thus if $M$ admits a finitely generated divisible $R\dash$module, it admits a cyclic module.

    Then $M \cong R/\ann M$, and there are two cases:

    - $\ann M = 0$, in which case $M\cong R$.
      Then choosing $r\in R^\bullet\setminus R\units$, then $[r]: R\to R$ is *not* a surjection.

    - Otherwise, choose $x\in \ann(M) \setminus \theset{0}$.
      Then $\times x: R \to R$ is the same map as $\times 0: R\to R$, so it is not surjective.

Fact: there is a classification of divisible (iff injective) $\ZZ\dash$modules:

- $(\QQ, +)$, since the fraction field of any domain is divisible.
- $(\QQ/\ZZ, +) = \bigoplus_{\text{primes}} \QQ_p / \ZZ_p$, where $\QQ_p / \ZZ_p = \lim \ZZ/p^n\ZZ$.
    This is isomorphic to the group of $p$ power roots of unity.
    On the other hand, $\QQ/\ZZ$ is the group of *all* roots of unity

Fact (Classification of Divisible $\ZZ\dash$Modules: 
:   Any divisible $\ZZ\dash$module is isomorphic to a direct sum of copies of

  - $(\QQ, +)$
  - $(\QQ_p/\ZZ_p, +)$

  Note that any direct sum of divisible groups is still divisible.
  Moreover, this decomposition is unique.

## Toward Localization

Proposition (Multiplicative Avoidance)
:   Let $S\subset R$ with $SS \subset S$, $1\in S$, $0\not\in S$.
    Define $\mci(S)  = \theset{I\normal R \suchthat I\intersect S = \emptyset}$.
    Then

    1. $\mci(S) \neq \emptyset$
    2. Every element of $\mci(S)$ is contained in a maximal element of $\mci(S)$.
    3. Every maximal element of $\mci(S)$ is prime. 

Proof
:   In parts:

    a. $(0) \in \mci(S)$ by construction.

    b. Standard Zorn's lemma argument. 

    c. Let $I \in \mci(S)$ be a maximal element, and let $x, y \in R$ such that $xy\in I$ with $x\not\in I$.
      Then $\generators{x, I} \supsetneq I$, so $S\intersect \generators{x, I} \neq \emptyset$ by maximality.
      I.e., there exists $s_1 \in S$ such that $s_1 = i_1 + ax$ for some $a\in R$.
      Continuing this way, if $y\not \in I$, produce an $s_2  = i_2 + by_1$ for some $b\in R$.
      Since $S$ is multiplicatively closed, $s_1 s_2 \in S$.
      But we also have $s_1 s_2 = (i_1 + ax)(i_2 + by) \in I$, a contradiction.

> See Kaplansky's Commutative Algebra book.

Proposition
:   Let $\mfp \in \spec(R)$ and $I_1, \cdots, I_n \normal R$, then if $\mfp \supset \prod I_i$, then $\mfp \supset I_i$ for some $i$.

Proof
:   Suppose $\mfp \supsetneq I_i$ for any $i$, and let $x_i \in I_i \setminus \mfp$.
    Consider $x \definedas \prod x_i \in \prod I_i \subset \mfp$; then since $\mfp$ is prime, some $x_i \in \mfp$.
    
Corollary:
:   If $\mfp \supset I^n$, then $\mfp \supset I$.

> I.e. prime ideals are radical.

## Radicals

Definition
:   An *element* $x\in R$ is *nilpotent* iff $x^n = 0$ for some $n\in \ZZ$.
    An *ideal* is *nilpotent* iff $I^n = (0)$ for some $n$, and is *nil* iff every element $x\in I$ is nilpotent.
