# Wednesday January 22nd

Let $R$ be a ring and let $\mathcal{I} (R)$ be the set of ideals $I\normal R$. 
This algebraic structure is

- Partially ordered under inclusion
- Forms a complete lattice with $\sup$ the ideal generated by a family and $\inf$ the intersection.
- Forms a commutative monoid under $I+J$
- Forms a commutative monoid under $IJ$

For any commutative monoid $(M, +)$, there exists a group completion $G(M)$ such that

- $G(M)$ is a commutative group
- $g: M \to G(M)$ is a monoid homomorphism
- For any map $\phi: (M, +) \to (G, +)$  into a commutative group, we have the following diagram

\begin{tikzcd}
M \arrow[rr, "\forall \phi"] \arrow[rdd, "g"] &                                   & G \\
                                              &                                   &   \\
                                              & M(G) \arrow[ruu, "\exists! \Phi"] &  
\end{tikzcd}

> So $\phi$ factors through $M(G)$.

If this exists, it is unique up to unique isomorphism (as are all objects defined by universal properties).
It remains to construct it.

Exercise:
For $(M, +)$ a commutative monoid, show that TFAE

1. There exists an injective $\iota: M \injects G$ monoid homomorphism for $G$ some commutative group.
2. The map $g: M \to G(M)$ is an injection.
3. $M$ is cancellative, i.e. $\forall x,y,z\in M$ we have $x+z = y+z \implies x = y$, i.e. the map $p_z(x) = x + z$ is injective.

> The content here is in $3 \implies 1$.

A commutative monoid is *reduced* iff $M\units = (0)$, i.e. if "$\forall m\in M\exists n $ such that $m+n = 0$" $\implies $m=0$

Example:
$(\NN, +)$ and $(\ZZ^+, \cdot)$ are cancellative and reduced.

Definition
$z\in M$ is a zero element iff $z+x = z$ for all $x\in M$.

Remark:
If $M$ has a zero element, then $G(M) = \theset{0}$.

$(0)$ is a zero element of $(\mathcal I(R), \cdot)$, so this is not cancellative.
If we take $\mathcal{I}^\bullet$ the set of nonzero ideals with multiplication, then this is a submonoid of $\mathcal{I}(R)$ iff $R$ is a domain.

For $R$ a domain, let $\mathcal{I}_1(R)$ be the set of nonzero principal ideals of $R$, then $\mathcal I_1(R) = R^\bullet/R\units$, so this is reduced and cancellative.

What is the group completion? 
In this case, it will consist of fractional ideals.

If $R$ is a PID, then $\mathcal I_1^\bullet(R) = \mathcal I^\bullet (R)$ is reduced and cancellative.

Example:
$\mathcal I^\bullet \cong (\ZZ^+, \cdot)$.

Warning:
If $R$ is not a PID, then $\mathcal I^\bullet(R)$ need not be cancellative.

Exercise:
Take $R = \ZZ[\sqrt{-3}]$ and $p_2 \definedas \generators{1+\sqrt{-3}, 1-\sqrt{-3}}$.
Show that $\abs{R/p_2} = 2$, $\abs{R/(2)} = 4$, and $p_2^2 = p_2(2)$ and $\abs{R/p_2^2} = 8$.
Conclude that $\mathcal I^\bullet(R)$ is not cancellative.

What went wrong here?
Take $K = \QQ[\sqrt{-3}]$, then $\ZZ_k[\frac{1 + \sqrt{-3}}{2}]$ is the integral closure of $\ZZ$ in $K$.
$\ZZ_k$ is a Dedekind domain, and there are inclusions

\begin{align*}
\ZZ \subset \ZZ[\sqrt{-3}] \subsetneq \ZZ[\frac{1 + \sqrt{-3}}{2}] \subseteq K
.\end{align*}

Here the problem is that $\ZZ[\sqrt{-3}]$ is not a Dedekind domain.
If $R$ is a Dedekind domain, then $\mathcal I^\bullet(R)$ is cancellative.

Exercise:
Does the converse hold?

> Things that are too small to be the full rings of integers, and things tend to wrong.

## Pushing / Pulling

Let $f: R\to S$ be a ring homomorphism.

We can define a pushforward on the set of ideals $\mathcal{I}(R)$:

\begin{align*}
f_*: \mathcal{I}_R \to \mathcal{I}(S) \\
I \mapsto \generators{f(I)}
.\end{align*}

and a pullback

\begin{align*}
f^*: \mathcal{I}(S) \to \mathcal{I}(R) \\
J \mapsto f\inv(J)
.\end{align*}

Exercise:
Show that $f\inv(J) \normal R$.

For $I \normal R$ and $J\normal S$.

