# Friday February 7th

## Weil Height Machine

What is the analog of the $x\dash$coordinate of an elliptic curve for a general abelian variety?
Answer: an ample base point divisor.

Let $K$ be an NPFF (Northcott Product Formula Field), $V/k$ a projective variety and $\phi: V \to \PP^n$, then define

\begin{align*}
h_\phi: V(K\sep) &\to [0, \infty)
p &\mapsto \log H(\phi(p))
.\end{align*}

*Key property:*
Take hyperplanes $\psi: V \to \PP^m \supset H'$ and $\phi: V\to \PP^n \supset H$, noting that the picard group of $\PP^n$ is $\ZZ$.
Suppose $\phi^* \sim \psi^* H'$, then $h_\phi = h_\psi + O(1)$.
Generally, we'll want to identify functions whose difference is a bounded function.

> Highly recommended: Diophantine Geometry, Handry-Silvermann GTM

**Theorem (Weil Height):**
Let $K$ be a NPFF (e.g. a global field) and $V/K$ a smooth projective variety.
There exists a map $h_{V, \wait}: \div V \to \RR^{V(K\sep)}$ from divisors on $V$ to ? which is unique modulo bounded functions such that 

a. For $H \subset \PP^n$ a hyperplane, the divisor $h_{\PP_1^n H} = h + O(1)$ (for the previously defined $h$).

b. Pullbacks: For $\phi: V\to W$ a smooth morphism and $D\in \div W$, we have $h_{V, \phi^* D} = h_{W, D}\circ \phi + O(1)$.

c. Linearity: For all divisors $D_1, D_2 \in \div V$, $h_{V, D_1 + D_2} = h_{V, D_1} + h_{V, D_2} = O(1)$.

d. If $D_1 \sim D_2$, then $h_{V, D_1} = h_{V, D_2} + O(1)$.

e. Positivity: Let $D\subset \div V$ be effective and $B$ the base locus (common intersection of linearly equivalent effective divisors), then$h_{V, D}(p) \geq O(1)$ for all $P \in (V\setminus B)(K\sep)$.

f. Let $D, E \in \div V$ with $D$ ample and $E$ algebraically equivalent to $0$. 
Then $\lim_{P \in V(K\sep), h_{V,D}(p) \to \infty} h_{V, E}(p) / h_{V,D}(p) = 0$.

> Ample: Chern class of line bundle is zero.

g. Finiteness: $D \in \div V$ is ample. For all map into $L/K$ and $r\in \RR$, the set $\theset{p\in V(L) \suchthat h_{V, 0}(p) \leq R  }$ is finite.

> Note every ample divisor has the Northcott property.
> Every abelian variety has an ample *symmetric* divisor.

Let $V = A/K$ be an abelian variety and $D\in \div A$ a divisor, see section A.7 in Silverman.
Some properties of such divisors:

1. (A.7.25) For all $\n\in \ZZ$, $[n]^* D \sim \frac{n^2 + n}{2}D + \frac{n^2 - n}{2} [-1]^*D$ (standard fact).
  If $[D]$ is symmetric, i.e. $[-1]D \sim D$, $[n]^* D \sim n^2 D$
  If $[D]$ anti-symmetric, i.e. $[-1]^* D \sim -D$, then $[n]^*D \sim nD$.i.e. $[-1]^* D \sim -D$, then $[n]^*D \sim nD$i.e. $[-1]^* D \sim -D$, then $[n]^*D \sim nD$.

2. (A.7.210?) Let $D$ be effective, then $2D$ is basepoint free and TFAE:

  - $D$ is ample.
  - $\psi_\ell: A \to A\dual$ where $x \mapsto \phi_x^*D - D$ has finite kernel.
  - $A \to \PP(L(2D))$ is finite.

3. **(A.7.33)** Define 4 maps, $\sigma, \delta, \pi_1, \pi_2: A\cross A \to A$,
\begin{align*}
\sigma(P, Q) = P + Q \quad \delta(P, Q) = P - Q \quad \pi_1(P, Q) = P \quad \pi_2(P, Q) = Q
,\end{align*}

  Then
  
  a. For $D\in \div A$, $[D]$ is symmetric iff $\sigma^* D + \delta^* D \sim 2\pi_1^* D + 2\pi_2^* D$.
  
  b. [D] is antisymmetric iff $\sigma^* \sim \pi_1^* D + \pi_2^* D$ iff $[D] \in \pic^0 A$.

  > Proof: see Silverman, uses "Theorem of the Square" and the "Seesaw Principle".
