# Wednesday January 29th

A remark on weak Mordell-Weil:

*Definition:*
A profinite group (e.g. group occurring as an absolute Galois group) is *small* if for all $n \in \ZZ^+$, the set of open subgroups of $g$ of index $n$ is finite.

**Proposition:**
For any $g = g_K = \Aut(K\sep/K)$, $g$ is small iff $K$ has only finitely many separable extensions of any fixed degree $d$.

*Definition:*
A field $K$ is *big* iff its Galois group $g_K$ is small.

> Warning: In general not related to cardinality.

If $K$ is big and contains $n$th roots of unity $\mu_n \in K$, then for all $n\geq 2$, the maximal abelian extension of exponent dividing $n$ is finite (by Kummer theory)
Therefore, if $A/K$ is any commutative algebraic group (plus conditions?), then $A(K)/ nA(K)$ is finite.

Fields that are big:

- Finite fields
- Algebraically closed fields
- $\RR$ and any real closed field $\iff$
- $p\dash$adic fields

But $\FF_q((A))$ is *not* big.

> The Weak Mordell Weil proof goes through if you look at integral points instead of just rational points.
> Dirichlet unit theorem gives WMW for the multiplicative group.

## Height Functions

Let $(K, \Sigma_K, A)$ be a product formula field where $K$ is a number field and $K = k(C)$ for $C/K$ is a nice curve for $k$ any field.

> Don't need to assume separability, but we will!

A height function is a function $H: \PP^n(K) \to \RR$.
We assume the product formula field $K$ has the *Northcott property*, i.e. $\theset{ p\in \PP^n(K) \suchthat H(P) \leq R  }$ is finite for ever $n$ and every $R$.

*Remark:*
A number field $K$ has the Northcott property, and $k(C)$ has this property iff $k$ is finite.

1. This gives an estimate for change in $H$ under finite morphisms $f: \PP^n \to \PP^m$.
2. For $E/K$ with $y^2 = P_S(x)$, then $H: E(K) \to \RR$ given by $p\mapsto H([X(p): 1])$.

View $X: E \to \PP^1$ is a 2:1 map given by taking $x$ coordinates.

Sticking point:
The "near-quadraticity" of $H$, i.e. the second property of height functions.
We won't have Weierstrass equations for abelian varieties, so we don't want to do this.
Instead, we'll develop 

1. Weil's height machine
2. Néron-Tate canonical heights on abelian varieties $A/K$.


