# Friday January 17th

Recall the Height Descent Theorem (see previous notes).
Most important property of height function: the collection of elements under a given height is finite.

> Note that $A/nA$ is the cokernel of multiplication by $n$.

Proof:
Let $r$ be the size of $A/nA$ and choose coset representatives $Q_1, \cdots, Q_r$.
For $P\in G$ (?) define $P_0 = P$ and $P_k$ such that $P_{k-1} = n P_k + Q_i$ for any $i$.

For all positive $k \in \ZZ$, we have $P = n^k P_k + \sum n^j Q_i$.

Claim:
There exists a $c> 0$ such that for all $P \in A$ there exists a $K = K(P)$ such that for all $k\geq K$, $h(P_k) \leq C$.
If this holds, $A$ is generated by $\theset{Q_i} \union h\inv((-\infty, C])$.

Proof of claim:
Let $c_2 = \max_{1\leq i \leq r} c_2(-Q_i)$.

Then

\begin{align*}
h(P_k) \leq \frac 1 {n^2} \qty{ h(nP_k) + c_3  } \\
= \frac 1 {n^2} \qty{ h(P_{k-1} - Q_i) + c_3  } \\
\leq \frac 1 {n^2} \qty{ 2h(P_{k-1}) + c_2 + c_3  } \\
\leq \frac 1 {n^2} \qty{ \frac 2 {n^2} \qty{ 2h(P_{k-1}) + c_2 + c_3  } + c_2 + c_3} \quad \text{by repeating} \\
= \qty{ \frac{2}{n^2}  }^2 h(P_{k-2}) + (1 + \frac{2}{n^2})(c_2 + c_3) \\
&= \qty{\frac 2 {n^2}  }^k h(P) + \frac 1 {n^2} \qty{1 + 2/n^2 + (2/n^2)^2 + \cdots (2/n^2)^k   }(c_2 + c_3) \\
&\leq \qty{\frac{2}{n^2}  }^k h(P) + \qty{ \frac{1}{1 - \frac{2}{n^2}}  }(c_2 + c_3) 
,\end{align*}

where the last inequality follows because $n \geq 2$ implies the leading term is bounded by 1 and the middle term contains a convergent series.

This proves the claim for any $n$?

$\qed$

Definition:
A function $h:A \to \RR$ from a commutative group is *quadratic* if the associated function $h(x+y) - h(x) - h(y) \definedas B_h:A^2 \to \RR$ is bilinear.
The function $h$ is *linear* iff $B_h$ is constant.

The function $h$ is a *quadratic form* iff $h$ is quadratic and for all $m\in \ZZ$ and for all $x\in A$, $h(mx) = m^2 h(x)$.

> I.e. a degree 2 homogeneous function.


Theorem (Canonical Height Descent):
Suppose $(A, +)$ is commutative and $h: A\to \RR$ is a quadratic form.
Suppose $A/nA$ is finite.

