# Wednesday January 8

Summary:

1. Mordell-Weil theorem
  - For elliptic curves over global fields (number fields, function fields, finite fields, etc)
  - Proof uses Galois cohomology and height functions, essentially one proof!
  - Holds for abelian varieties, but more difficult (need an analog of height functions, i.e. an $x\dash$coordinate)
2. Height functions (possibly)
3. Elliptic curves over $\QQ_p$ or complete discrete valuation fields (see Silverman for basics, possibly Chapter 5), particularly Tate curves
4. Weil-Chatelet groups $E/k$ related to $H^1(\k; E)$ with coefficients in the elliptic curve
5. Galois representation of $E/k$ for $\ch k = 0$, for $\rho_n g_k \to \GL(2, \ZZ/n\ZZ)$ which leads to $\hat \rho: g_k \to \GL(\hat \ZZ)$.

# Mordell-Weil Groups

Let $E/k$ be an elliptic curve over a field $k$, i.e. a smooth, projective, geometrically integral curve of genus 1 with a $k\dash$rational point $O$.

> Note: Silverman good for foundations, but assumes $k$ is perfect! 
> Here we'll assume $k$ is arbitrary.

Remark: 
If $k$ is not algebraically closed, such a point $O$ may not exist.

By Riemann-Roch (easy computation) $E$ embeds (non-canonically) into $\Bbb{P}^2/k$ as a Weierstrass cubic 
\begin{align*}
y^2 + a_1 xy + a_3 y = x^3 + a_2 x^2 + a_4 x + a_6 \quad \Delta \neq 0
.\end{align*}

> This is a smoothness condition, and this equation has a $k\dash$rational point at infinity $[0: 1: 0]$.
> The line at infinity is a flex line (?), and so only intersects this curve at one point.

If $\ch k \neq 2,3$ then $y^2 = x^3 + Ax + B$.

Every elliptic curve is given by a Weierstrass equation, although not in a unique way.

**An amazing fact:**
The $k\dash$rational points $E(k)$ forms an abelian group with zero as the identity.

Proof:

1. Given any plane cubic $C/k$ and an origin $O \in C(k)$, the chord and tangent process yields a group structure.
  Note that there is a symmetry in connecting rational points $a, b$ with a line an intersecting at another rational point $c$ which is not present in most groups, so an additional inversion about $O$ is needed to actually make this into a group. 
  Proving associativity: difficult!

2. Look at $\mathrm{Pic}^0 E$, the degree 0 divisors on $E$ mod birational equivalence (?), which is equal to the degree 0 line bundles on $E$ mod bundle isomorphism.

There is a map $C(k) \to \mathrm{Pic}^1 C$ given by sending $p$ is its equivalence class; this is a bijection by Riemann-Roch (straightforward exercise).
