# Wednesday February 12th

## Correction to Weil's Height Machine

Let $K$ be a NPFF (from now onwards: just a global field) and $X/K$ a nice variety.
Let $D\in \div(X)$ be ample and consider the points of bounded height $\theset{ p\in V(K) \suchthat h(p) \leq R  }$; by the Northcott property this is finite for every $R \in \RR$.

Counterexample:
Let $X = E$ an elliptic curve and $D = [0]$.
Then $\ell(D) = \dim{f\in K(X) \suchthat \div f\geq -D}$, the rational functions with poles no worse than order $D$.
Then $\ell[0] = 1$.

Then there is a corresponding morphism to projective space $\phi_D: X \to \PP(L(D)) = \PP^{\ell(d) - 1}$.
Here $\phi_D: E \to \PP^{\ell[0] - 1} = \PP^0 = \theset{\pt}$.

Thus if $E(K)$ is infinite, which is possible, then $\forall R\geq 1$ the set $\theset{p\in E(K) \suchthat h(p) \leq R} = E(K)$ is infinite as well.

How to fix this?
Replace "$D$ is ample" with "$D$ is ample and $\ell(D) \geq 2$".


> Note: not listed as a correction in Silverman's book.


**Theorem (C.1.9 Of Hindry-Silverman):**
Let $K$ be a number field (perhaps works with global function fields) and $n\geq 2$, with $A/K$ an abelian variety of dimension $g$.
Suppose $A[n] = A[n](K)$ (so a large extension of $K$), and let $S$ be a set of finite non-Archimedean places of $K$ containing places dividing $n$ and places of bad reduction.
Suppose all that the ring of $S\dash$integers, $\ZZ_{K, S}$, is a PID.


Then $\rk A[k] \leq 2g \rk \ZZ_{K, S}\units$.
We can then apply the Dirichlet unit theorem, the RHS is $2g(r_1 + r_2 + \# S - 1)$ where $r_1$ is the number of real places and $r_2$ is the number of complex places.

> This is an explicit upper bound, but a pretty bad one!

## Néron-Tate Canonical Height

Let $K$ be a global field.
We'll get a good canonical representative of the height functions studied previously, provided we get one additional piece of data.

**Theorem (Néron-Tate):**
Let $V/K$ be a nice variety and $D \in \div V$, and suppose there exists a morphism $\phi: V\to V$ such that there exists an $a\in \QQ^{> 1}$ with the induced map on $\pic V$ satisfies $\phi^* D \sim \alpha D$.
Then there exists a unique function 

\begin{align*}
\hat{h}_{V, \phi, D}: V(K\sep) \to \RR
\end{align*}

such that 

1. (CH1) $\hat h_{V, \phi, D} = h_{V, D} + O(1)$

2. (CH2) $\hat h_{V, \phi, D} \circ \phi = \alpha \hat_{V, D}$

Moreover, for all $p\in K\sep$, there is a stabilization 

\begin{align*}
\hat h_{\phi, D}(p) = \lim_n \frac{1}{\alpha^n} h_{V, D}(\phi^n(p))$.
.\end{align*}

*Proof:*
We first need to show that the stated limit exists.
Applying Weil's Height Machine to $\phi^* D \sim \alpha D$, there exists a $c$ such that

\begin{align*}
\abs{ h_{V, D} \circ \phi  - \alpha h_{V, D}} \leq c
.\end{align*}

So take a separable point $p\in V(K\sep)$.

Claim:
$\alpha^{-n} h_{V, D}(\phi^n(p))$ is Cauchy in $\RR$ and thus convergent.

Proof:
Let $m\leq n$, then we want to show

\begin{align*}
\abs{ \alpha^{-n} h_{V, D}( \phi^n (p) ) - \alpha^{-m} h_{V, D}( \phi^n (p) ) } 
&=
\abs{ \sum_{i=m+1}^n \alpha^{-i} \qty{ h_{V, D} (\phi^i(p)) - \alpha h_{V, D}( \phi^{i-1}(p)  )  }  } \\
&=
\abs{ \sum_{i=m+1}^n \alpha^{-i} \qty{ h_{V, D} (\phi^i(p)) - \alpha h_{V, D}( \phi^{i-1}(p)  )  }  } \\
.\end{align*}


