# Friday March 6th

Analytic uniformization, beginning of discussion about Tate curves.
Gives us a way to use analysis to understand a variety.

Tate curves: let $(K, \abs{\wait}) = \RR, \CC$ or a complete nonarchimedean field.
Recall that if $K$ is $p\dash$adic, then $(K, +)$ has no nontrivial lattices (closed, discrete subgroups).
For $\CC$ we have an infinite-dimensional covering map $\exp: \CC/\ZZ \mapsvia{z\mapsto e^{2\pi i z}} (\CC\units, \cdot)$ which is an isomorphism of $\CC\dash$lie groups.

If $\tau \in \HH$ and $\Lambda_s = \generators{1, \tau}$, then taking the exponential yields $C/\Lambda_S \mapsvia{\exp} \CC\units/\generators{q_\tau}$ where $q_\tau = e^{2\pi i q}$ and $0 < \abs{q_\tau} < 1$, which is a type of "additive uniformization".

Thus if $E/\CC$ is any elliptic curve, then there exists such a $q\in \CC$ such that $E(\CC) \cong C\units/\generators{q}$.

Remark:
The map $q \mapsto j(q)$ is generally not injective.
Note that $j$ factors through the quotient

\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
j\HH \arrow[rr] \arrow[rrdd, dashed] &  & \CC                                    \\
                                     &  &                                        \\
                                     &  & {\sl(2, \ZZ)\ \HH} \arrow[uu, "\cong"]
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

In other words, for $(a, b; c, d) \in \sl(2, \ZZ)$ we have $j(\tau) = j\qty{\frac{a\tau + b}{c\tau + d}}$.
The indeterminacy here is given by $e^{2\pi i \tau_1} = e^{2\pi i \tau_2}$ iff $j_2 = j_1 + b$ for some $b\in  \ZZ$ and $(1, b; 0, 1) \xi = \xi + b$.

Last time we saw that $(K, \abs{\wait})$ is locally compact and $q\in K$ with $0< \abs q < 1$, then $\generators{q} = q^\ZZ$ is a full lattice in $K\units$.
Proof last time, a one-liner using compactness of the unit ball.

Exercise
: If $\Lambda \in K\units$ is a full lattice (discrete, closed, compact quotient/cocompact), then $\Lambda = q^\ZZ$ for a unique $q$ with $0 < \abs q < 1$.
  The content: can't take $\abs{q} = 1$.
  Think about what happens if you take a $p\dash$adic field and start taking powers, see what it is dense in.

> Modding out by finite group doesn't lose compactness.

Exercise
: What are the full lattices in $(K\units)^g$?
  Higher dimensional abelian varieties are also uniformized by lattices in $\CC^g$.
  Claim: all isomorphic to $\ZZ^g$.

Exercise
: For $K = \RR$, $0 < \abs{q} < 1$, then 

\begin{align*}
R\units /\generators{q} \cong 
\begin{cases}
\RR/\ZZ \cross \ZZ/2\ZZ \quad q > 0 \\
\RR/\ZZ \quad q < 0
\end{cases}
.\end{align*}

> Primary source material for Tate Curves: Silverman Chapter 5

In fact, for all $E/\RR$ there exists a $0 < \abs q < 1$ such that $E(\RR) \cong E_q$ as $\RR\dash$lie groups, where $E_q \cong \RR\units / \generators{q}$.
So the Tate parameter $q$ is telling you whether or not 2-torsion exists.
Also relates sign of $q$ to sign of discriminant.
Can take $q$ series in the sense of modular forms, starting next week.

> Note: these $q$ series will still converge in $K$.

For our purposes, take $(K, \abs{\wait})$ a complete nonarchimedean field, $0< \abs{q} < 1$ in $K$, $E_q \definedas K\units/\generators{q}$ is a compact commutative 1-dimensional $K\dash$analytic lie group.

How all of this will end up working:

Theorem (Tate, Part A)
: For $(K, \abs{\wait})$ a complete nonarchimedean field and $q$ a Tate parameter, there exists an elliptic curve $E_q/K$ and a $K\dash$analytic group isomorphism
  $$
  \phi: K\units/\generators{q} \mapsvia{\cong} E_q(K)
  $$
  Moreover, $E_q$ has split multiplicative reduction.

Theorem (Tate, Part B)
: Moreover, for all finite extensions $L/K$, note that we can extend the norm to the algebraic closure uniquely (by Number Theory II), and the following diagram commutes
  
  \begin{tikzcd}
  K\units/\generators{q} \arrow[dd, hook] \arrow[rr] &  & E_q(K) \arrow[dd, hook] \\
                                                    &  &                         \\
  L\units/\generators{q} \arrow[rr]                  &  & E_q(L)                 
  \end{tikzcd}

Taking the $\limdir$ over finite $L/K$, $\phi: \bar K\units /\generators{q} \mapsvia{\cong} E_q(\bar k)$.
Moreover, $\phi$ is equivariant for $\aut(\bar K/K)$, i.e. for all $\sigma \in \aut(\bar k/k)$ and $x\in \bar K\units/\generators{q}$, $\phi(\sigma x) = \sigma(\phi x)$.
For $N \in \ZZ^+$ with $\ch K \notdivides N$, we have $E_q[N] \cong (K\sep)\units / \generators{q} [N]$ as $g_K\dash$modules.
Note that $\mu_N$ is a subgroup of the RHS, which is fixed under the galois action.

Punch line: every elliptic curve comes with a unique order $N$ subgroup which is galois-invariant.
Thus we reduce the question of computing the galois module structure of torsion points to a qual-level algebra problem of computing galois extensions.

Theorem (Tate, Part C)
: Suppose $K$ is discretely valued, $\abs{x} = C^{-v(x)}$, $v(K^x) = \ZZ$. 
  Then $E_q$ has split multiplicative reduction.
