# Wednesday February 26th

Example (regarding generalization from last time)
: Let $G = \prod^\infty \ZZ/p^n\ZZ$, which is a commutative pro-$p$ group.
  Then $\oplus \ZZ_p^n \ZZ \subsetneq G[\tors] \subsetneq G$ with proper containments, but the direct sum is dense in the direct product, so $G[\tors]$ is proper and dense and thus not closed.


## (Clark-Xarles) Local Bounds for Torsion Points on Abelian Varieties

> Recommended reading! Introduces a lot of tools in their most basic form.

Let $K/\QQ_p$ be a $p\dash$adic field with $[K: \QQ_p] = d$, $R$ a valuation ring, $\mfm$ a maximal ideal, $\FF_q = R/\mfm$.

> Recall previously: finiteness on torsion subgroups in certain cases.
> Mordell-Weil works for global fields, but what is that finite group?
> No positive results bounding the torsion for a Laurent series field, can be arbitrary large.


Let $A/K$ be a $g\dash$dimensional abelian variety and recall 

\begin{align*}
A(K) &\cong_{\mathrm{TopGrp}} (R, +)^g \oplus T \cong \ZZ_p^{dg} \oplus T
,\end{align*}
where $\abs{T} < \infty$

We'll prove bounds in three steps:

1. Good reduction
2. Potentially good reduction
3. General reduction and results in the case of *anisotropic reduction*.

Definition
: $A/K$ has *good reduction* if there exists a smooth group scheme $A?R$ with generic fiber $A/K$.

Noting that $\spec(R) = \theset{(0), (\pi)}$ is a two point space, we have the fibers
\begin{tikzcd}
A \arrow[dd] &  & A/K \arrow[dd] &  & A/\FF_q \arrow[dd] \\
             &  &                &  &                    \\
\spec(R)     &  & (0)            &  & (\pi)             
\end{tikzcd}

We get a SES
$$
0 \to A' \to A(R) \mapsvia{\text{reduction}} A(\FF_q) \to 0
$$
and the fact that it is surjective is due to **Hensel's lemma**.
Here $A' = \mfm^g$ endowed with a formal group law.
Since we have a projective variety, we can clear denominators to replace $A(R)$ with $A(K)$ in the above sequence.
Note that the quotient is precisely a Mordell-Weil group, so using the Weil conjectures, we can say quite a bit about its size.

Thus $A' \injects A(K)$ is an open finite-index subgroup.
Moreover, all of the torsion is $p\dash$primary, and $A'[\tors] = A'[p^\infty]$.
Define $G[\tors]'$ to be the torsion that is prime to $p$.
If the kernel is $p\dash$primary torsion, then the reduction map induces an isomorphism 

\begin{align*}
r: A(K)[\tors]' \mapsvia{\cong} A(\FF_q)[\tors]'
.\end{align*}

Theorem (Weil, Serre. Improved Weil Bounds)
: $\# A(\FF_q) \leq \floor{ (1 + \sqrt q)^2}^g$.
  (Note that Weil's original bound is just this without the floor function.) 

Therefore, for $A/K$ and $K/\QQ$ a number field of degree $d$,
choose $\mfp_1, \mfp_2$ in $\spec \ZZ_k$ points of good reduction.
Then

\begin{align*}
\# A(K)[\tors] \leq \floor{ \qty{1+p_1^{\frac d 2}   }^2  }^g
\floor{ \qty{ 1 + p_2^{\frac d 2}  }^2  }
.\end{align*}

> Note: potentially "blah" always means "blah" after some base extension.

Definition
: Let $K$ be a $p\dash$adic field, then $A/K$ has *potentially good reduction* iff there exists a finite degree extension $L/K$ such that base extending to $L$, $A/L$, has good reduction.

Fact
: $\# A(K)[\tors]' \leq \floor{\qty{1 + \sqrt q  }^2  }^g$.

Remark
: If $\endo(A)$ is "large enough", e.g. if $A$ has $X\dash$multiplication for $X = \CC, \HH$ (complex or quaternionic) then $A$ must have potentially good reduction (see Pete's thesis).
