---
title: Interesting Topological Spaces in Algebraic Geometry
---

# Ideas for Spaces

- Curves
  - Elliptic Curves
  - Higher genus
  - Hyperelliptic curves
  - The modular curve
- Surfaces
  - Compact Riemann surfaces
    - Bolza Surface (Genus 2)
    - Klein Quartic (Genus 3)
    - Hurwizt Surfaces
  - Kummer surfaces
- Compact Complex Surfaces
  - Rational ruled
  - Enriques Surfaces
  - $K3$
    - Kahler Manifolds
  - Kodaira
  - Toric
  - Hyperelliptic
  - Properly quasi-elliptic
  - General type
  - Type VII
- Fake projective planes 
- Conics
- Calabi-Yau manifolds
  - Dimension 1: All elliptic curves (up to homeomorphism)
  - Dimension 2: $K3$ surfaces
  - Dimension 3 (threefolds): 500 million +, unknown if infinitely many
  - The bananafold
  - Hyperkähler
- Hurwitz schemes
- Topological galois groups, e.g. $G(\bar F /F )$ for $F = \QQ, \FF_p$.
- $\spec (R)$ for $R$ a DVR (a Sierpinski space)
- Quiver Grassmannians
- Rigid analytic spaces
- Affine line with two origins
- Moduli stack of elliptic curves $\mathcal{M}_{1, 1}$.
- Abelian Surface
- Fano Varieties
 - Curves: isomorphic to $\PP^1$
 - Surfaces: Del Pezzo surfaces
- Weighted projective space
- Toric Varieties
- Grassmannian
- Flag Varieties
- Moduli Spaces

> Due to Kunihiko Kodaira's classification of complex surfaces, we know that any compact hyperkähler 4-manifold is either a K3 surface or a compact torus T^{4}. (Every Calabi–Yau manifold in 4 (real) dimensions is a hyperkähler manifold, because SU(2) is isomorphic to Sp(1).)

> As was discovered by Beauville, the Hilbert scheme of k points on a compact hyperkähler 4-manifold is a hyperkähler manifold of dimension 4k. This gives rise to two series of compact examples: Hilbert schemes of points on a K3 surface and generalized Kummer varieties.

# Intro/Motivation

> Ursula Whitcher

Assume the universe is a "space".
Which one is it? 
What structures does it have?
How many possible spaces *could* it be, and how can we test to find out?

# Analogies

> Notation: all dimensions are over $\RR$.

Impossible goal: pick a category, understand all of the objects and all of the maps.
Two main categories with a forgetful functor: $\mathbf{Diff} \to \mathbf{Top}$.
Question:

- What's in the "image" of this functor? (Manifolds that admit a differentiable structure.)
- What is the "fiber" above a given topological manifold? (Distinct differentiable structures)


Differentiable Manifolds: classified by geometric structure in low dimensions ($\leq 4$), algebraic data/methods in high dimensions


## Topological Category

Identify objects up to homeomorphism

- Dimension 0: The point (terminal object)
- Dimeions 1: $S^1, \RR$
- Dimension 2: $\gens{\SS, \TT, \RP \suchthat \SS = 0, 3\RP = \RP + \TT }$. Classified by $\pi_1$ (orientability and "genus"). Riemann, Poincare, Klein.
- Dimension 3: Can always be given a unique smooth structure, see uniformization.
- Dimension 4:
- Dimension $n\geq 5$:


## Smooth Category

Generally expect things to split into more classes.

- 2-manifolds: Homeomorphic $\iff$ diffeomorphic. 
  Every surface admits a complex structure and a metric. 
  Thus always orientable.
  - Uniformization: Holomorphically equivalent to a quotient of one of three spaces
    - $\CP^1$, positive curvature (spherical)   
    - $\CC$, zero curvature (flat)
    - $\HH$ (equiv. $\DD^\circ$), negative curvature (hyperbolic)
  - Stratified by genus:
    - Genus 0: Only $\CP^1$
    - Genus 1: All of the form $\CC/\Lambda$, with a distinguished point $[0]$, i.e. an elliptic curve.
      Has a topological group structure!
- 3-manifolds: Thurston's Geometrization
  - Oriented prime 3-manifolds can be decomposed into geometric "pieces" of 8 possible types
  - Geometric structure: a diffeo $M\cong \tilde M/\Gamma$ where $\Gamma$ is a discrete Lie group acting freely/transitively on $X$
- 4-manifolds: classified in the topological category by surgery, but not in the smooth category
- $n\dash$manifolds, $n\geq 5$: classified by surgery

# Moduli Spaces


# Elliptic Curves

- Equivalently, Riemann surfaces with one marked point.
- Equivalently, $\CC/\Lambda$ a lattice, where homothetic lattices (multiplication by  $\lambda \in \CC\smz$) are equivalent.
- Parameterized by a moduli space:
  - For $X = \CC/\Lambda$ choose a positively oriented basis $\theset{z, w}$ for $\Lambda$
    - Note: push into meridians on a torus, generators of $H_1(X)$, and require that their intersection is $+1$.

# Kahlers

- For complex manifold, replace Riemannian metric with a Hermitian metric (positive definite sesquilinear inner product on tangent bundle)
- If skew-symmetric part is symplectic (closed and nondegenerate) then the metric is Kahler
- Includes smooth projective varieties, but not all complex manifolds
- Specialize to Calabi-Yaus: compact and Ricci-flat, or first Chern class vanishes

# Calabi-Yaus

- As manifolds: Ricci-flat, i.e. Ricci curvature tensor vanishes (measures deviation of volumes of "geodesic balls" from Euclidean balls of the same radius).
- Applications: Physicists want to study $G_2$ manifolds (an exceptional Lie group, automorphisms of octonions), part of $M\dash$theory uniting several superstring theories, but no smooth or complex structures. 
  Indirect approach: compactify an 11-dimension space, one small $S^1$ dimension $\to$ 10 dimensions, 4 spacetime and 6 "small" Calabi-Yau.
