# Friday February 21st

## Singularities

Recall that there are three types of singularities:

- Removable
- Poles
- Essential

Recall that a function $g$ is holomorphic at $z_0$ iff
$$
\lim_{z\to z_0}  (z-z_0) g(z) = 0
$$

Theorem (3.2)
: An isolated singularity $z_0$ of $f$ is a pole $\iff \lim_{z\to z_0} f(z) = \infty$.

Theorem (3.3, Casorati-Weierstrass)
: If $f$ is holomorphic in $D_r(z_0) \setminus \theset{z_0}$ and has an essential singularity $z_0$, then there exists a radius $r$ such that $f(D_r(\theset{z_0})\setminus \theset{z_0})$ is dense in $\CC$.

Proof
:   Proceed by contradiction.
    Suppose there exists a $w\in \CC$ and a $\delta > 0$ such that
    $$
    D_\delta(w) \intersect f(D_r(\theset{z_0})\setminus \theset{z_0}) = \emptyset
    .$$

    If $z \in D_r(w)\setminus{z_0}$, then $\abs{f(z) - w} > \delta$.
    Define $g(z) = \frac{1}{f(z) - w}$ on $D_r(z_0) \setminus\theset{z_0}$; then $\abs{g(z)} < \frac{1}{\delta}$.

    > Note that this implies that $g(z)$ is holomorphic on $D_r(z_0) \setminus \theset{z_0}$.
    > $g(z)$ being holomorphic here follows from $f$ being holomorphic here.

    Then $g(z)$ has a removable singularity at $z = z_0$ by theorem 3.1.

    If $g(z_0) \neq 0$, then $f(z) - w$ is holmorphic at $z_0$, contradicting the fact that $z_0$ is an essential singularity.

    If instead $g(z_0) = 0$, then $z_0$ is a pole, again a contradiction.

> Note: revisit why this is a contradiction.


## Singularities at Infinity

The point $z=\infty$ can be one of three types of singularities:

1. *Removable* $\iff$ $f(z) = \sum_{k=-1}^\infty c_k \frac{1}{z^k}$.

    - I.e. only one positive exponent.

2. *Pole* $\iff$ $f(z) = \sum_{-\infty}^n c_k z^k$

    - I.e. there are finitely many positive exponents.

3. *Essential* $\iff$ $f(z) = \sum_{k=?}^\infty c_k z^k$

    - There are infinitely many positive exponents.
