# Wednesday April 1st

We call $f: U\to V$ biholomorphic if it admits a bijective holomorphic inverse.

Proposition
: If $f: U\to V$ is holomorphic and injective, then $f'(z) \neq 0$, $f$ is biholomorphic onto its image, and thus the inverse of a conformal map is also holomorphic.

Proof
:   We argue by contradiction and suppose $f'(z_0) =0$ for some $z_0 \in U$.
    Then $f(z) - f(z_0) = a(z-z_0)^k + G(z)$ for all $z$ near $z_0$,
    with $a\neq 0, k \geq 2$, and $G$ v anishing to order $k+1$ at $z_0$.
    For $w$ small enough, we write $f(z) - f(z_0) - w = F(z) + G(z)$ where $F(z) = a(z-z_0)^k - w$.

    Since $\abs G < \abs F$ on the boundary of a small disc $D_\eps(z_0)$ and $F$ has at least two zeros in $D_\eps(z_0)$, Rouche's theorem implies that $f(z) - f(z_0) - w$ has at least two zeros in this disc.

    Since $f'(z) \neq 0$ for all $z$ in a small punctured neighborhood of $z_0$, it follows that that roots of $f(z) - f(z_0) - w$ are distinct.
    But then $f$ is not injective, a contradiction.

    Now let $g = f\inv$ be the inverse of $f$ on its range, which we can assume is $V$.
    The second part of the proof follows from a Calculus argument, see slides.


Definition
: Two open sets are *conformally equivalent* iff there exist biholomorphic functions composing to the identity.

Recall the Cayley transform $w = F(z) = {i - z \over i + z}$ with inverse $z = G(w) = i {1-w \over 1 + w}$.

Theorem
: The map $F: \HH \to \DD$ is a conformal map with inverse $G$.

Proof (Sketch)
:   Use the fact that any point in $\HH$ is closer to $i$ than $-i$, so $\abs F < 1$.
    Then show $\Im G(w) > 0$ by expanding $w = u + iv$ and using that fact that $u^2 + v^2 < 1$.

The Cayley transform is a special case of a FLT $f(z) = {az + b \over cz + d}$.
Note that $f(-{d \over c}) = \infty$ is a pole, so $f$ should be defined with values in $\hat \CC \cong \CP^1$.
Since $\lim_{\abs z \to \infty}$ exists, the domain is naturally $\hat \CC$ as well.

Identify $\CP^1$ as the space of lines through $0$ in $\CC^{n+1}$.
Explicitly, take $\vector v, \vector w \in (\CC^{n+1})^\bullet$ and set $\vector v \sim \vector w \iff \vector v = \lambda \vector w$ for some $\lambda \in \CC\units$.
Define open sets using the quotient topology, and this yields a metric defined by
\begin{align*}
d([u], [v]) = \qty{ q - {\abs{ \inner{u}{v}  }} \over \norm{u} \cdot \norm{v} }
.\end{align*}

Let $\infty$ denote the point $(1, 0)^t \in \CP^1$, then every other point corresponds uniquely to an element of the form $(z, 1)^t$.
For any $A\in \GL(2, \CC)$, then $A$ acts on such an element by $L_A(a) = (az+b, cz+d)^t = {az+b \over cz + d} \in \CC$ (by dividing through the second term).

Under function composition, these are Lie groups, and the map $A \mapsto L_A$ is a group morphism.
For any $s\in \CC$, $L_{sA} = L_A$, and $L_A = L_{A_1}$ for some matrix $A_1$ of determinant 1, so $A_1 \in \SL(2, \CC)$.
Finally, $L_{A_1} = L_{A_2} \iff A_2 = \pm A_1$, so the group of FLTs is given by $\PSL(2, \CC) = \SL(2, \CC)/ \theset{\pm I}$.

Now consider taking $a,b,c,d \in\RR$, yielding the subgroup $\SL(2, \RR)$.
Then for any $A\in \GL(2, \RR)$, we have $L_A = L_{A_1}$ iff $A_1 \in \SL(2, \RR)$ and $\det A > 0$.
Moreover, each such $A$ preserves $\HH$.
