# Thursday January 30th

Recall how we constructed the hilbert scheme of hypersurfaces
$$
\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P_{m, d}} = \PP H^0(\PP^n; \OO(d))\dual
$$
A section $\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P}(s)$ corresponds to $z\in \PP^n_s$.
We can look at the exact sequence

\begin{align*}
0 \to I_Z(m) \to \OO_{\PP_S^n} \mapsvia{\text{restrict}} \OO_z(m) \to 0
.\end{align*}

as $\PP_s^n \mapsvia{\pi_s} S$, so we can pushforward along $\pi$, which is left-exact, so

\begin{align*}
0 \to \pi_{s*} I_Z(m) \to \pi_{s*} \OO_{\PP_S^n}  = \OO_S \tensor H^0(\PP^n; \OO(m)) \to \OO_z(m) \to R^1 \pi_{s*} I_Z(m) \to \cdots
.\end{align*}

*Idea:*
$Z \subset \PP_k^n$ will be determined (in families!) by the space of degree $d$ polynomials vanishing on $Z$ (?), i.e. $H^0(\PP^n, I_z(m)) \subset H^0(\PP^n, \OO(m))$ for $m$ very large.
This would give a map of functors $\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P} \to \Gr(N, H^0(\PP^n, \OO(m) ))$.
If this is a closed subfunctor, a closed subfunctor of a representable functor is representable and we're done.

Note: We need to get an $m$ uniform in $Z$, and more concretely:

1. First need to make sense of what it means for $Z$ to be determined by $H^0(\PP^n, I_Z(m))$ for $m$ only depending on $P$.
2. This works point by point, but we need to do this in families.
  I.e. we'll use the previous exact sequence, and want the $R^1$ to vanish.

Slogan:
We need uniform vanishing statements.
There is a convenient way to package the vanishing requirements needed here.
From now on, take $k=\bar k$ and $\PP^n = \PP_k^n$.

Definition
: A coherent sheaf $F$ on $\PP^n$ is $m\dash$regular if $H^i(\PP^n; F(m-i)) = 0$ for all $i> 0$.

Example
: Consider $\OO_{\PP^n}$, this is $0\dash$regular.
  Line bundles on $\PP_n$ only have 0 and top cohomology.
  Just need to check that $\H^n(\PP^n; \OO(-n)) = 0$, but by Serre duality this is $H^0(\PP^n; \OO(n) \tensor \omega_{\PP^n})\dual$ which is $H^0(\PP^n; \OO(-1))\dual = 0$.

**Proposition:**
Assume $F$ is $m\dash$regular.
Then

1. There is a natural multiplication map from linear forms on $\PP^n$, $H^0(\PP^n; \OO(1)) \tensor H^0(\PP^n; F(k)) \to H^0(\PP^n; F(k+1))$ which is surjective for $k\geq n$.

> Think of this as a graded module, this tells you the lowest number of small grade pieces needed to determine the entire thing.

2. $F$ is $m'\dash$regular for $m' \geq m$.

3. $F(k)$ is globally generated for $k\geq m$, i.e. the restriction $H^0(\PP^n; F(k)) \tensor \OO_{\PP^n} \to F(k) \to 0$ is exact (i.e. surjective).
