# Ch. 12: Lattice Points (Monday, March 01)

## Minkowski (Version 1)

:::{.remark}
Basic heuristic from last time: counting the lattice points in a region $R$ should be approximately $\vol(R)$.
We turned this into a theorem for certain regions:
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Let $R \subseteq \RR^n$ be a bounded region with a well-defined with respect to the Riemann integral.
Letting $L_{R}$ be the number of lattice points in $R$, we have
\[
{1\over t^n} L_{tR} \converges{t\to \infty}\to \vol(R)
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Most of today: Minkowski's theorem, which will guarantee a lattice point under some conditions.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Minkowski (Version 1)"}
Let $R \subseteq \RR^n$ be a bounded region that is

1. Convex, so any line segment connecting two points in $R$ is entirely contained within $R$, and 

2. Symmetric about $\vector 0$, so $\vector x\in R\implies -\vector x\in R$.

If $\vol(R) > 2^n$, then $R$ contains a nonzero lattice point.
:::

:::{.remark}
Any circle/ball or ellipse will be an example.
Note that $2^n$ is sharp, i.e. this theorem does not hold for a smaller constant: take the square $(-1, 1) \cross (-1, 1) \subseteq \RR^2$, which has volume 4 but only contains the origin as a lattice point.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Note that any such region already contains $\vector 0$, since containing $\vector x$ and $-\vector x$ plus convexity implies containing the line between them, which passes through $\vector 0$.
By assumption $\vol(R) > 2^n$, and hence $(1/t^n)L_{tR} > 2^n$ for $t$ large enough.
So set $t=m$ for some $m>> 1\in \ZZ^{\geq 0}$, this yields $L_{mR} > (2m)^n$.
Consider $\ZZ^n$ and taking all coordinates $\mod 2m$.
This yields $(2m)^n$ equivalence classes of points, so by the pigeonhole principle there exist $\vector v_1 \neq \vector v_2 \in mR$ such that $(\vector_1 - \vector_2)/2m \in \ZZ^n$, and the claim is that this is the lattice point we want.
Note that this is nonzero, why is it in the region $R$?
By definition, $(1/m)\vector v_1 \in R$ and $(-1/m)\vector v_2 \in R$ using the symmetric assumption.
The midpoint between these is precisely the previous point, and this is in $R$ by convexity.
:::

## Minkowski (Version 2)

:::{.definition title="Lattice"}
A **lattice** in $\RR^n$ is the $\ZZ\dash$span of a collection of $\RR\dash$linearly independent vectors in $\RR^n$.
:::

:::{.example title="$n=2$"}
\envlist

- \( \Lambda \da \ZZ \tv{1, 0}^t + \ZZ\ts{0, 1}^t \).
  This tiles the plane by squares.
- \( \Lambda \da \ZZ \tv{1, 1}^t + \ZZ\ts{1, 3}^t \).
  Note that this now tiles the plane by parallelograms:

\begin{tikzpicture}
  \draw[thin,gray!40] (-1,-1) grid (4,4);
  \draw[<->] (-1,0)--(4,0) node[right]{$x$};
  \draw[<->] (0,-1)--(0,4) node[above]{$y$};
  \draw[line width=1pt,blue,-stealth](0,0)--(1,1) node[anchor=south west]{$\boldsymbol{u}$};
  \draw[line width=1pt,purple,-stealth](1,1)--(2,4) node[anchor=south west]{};
  \draw[line width=1pt,purple,-stealth](0,0)--(1,3) node[anchor=north east]{$\boldsymbol{v}$};
\draw[line width=1pt,blue,-stealth](1,3)--(2,4) node[anchor=south west]{};

\draw [draw=black, fill=purple, opacity=0.4]
       (0,0) -- (1,1) -- (2,4) -- (1,3) -- cycle;
\end{tikzpicture}

- \( \Lambda \da \ZZ \tv{1, 0}^t \), which recovers \( \ZZ \subseteq \RR \).
  This is not a full lattice, since it lies in a proper subspace of $\RR^2$.

Note that this will always result in a free abelian group on $n$ generators.
Why not define a lattice this way?
Here's a non-example:

- \( \Lambda \da \ZZ \tv{\sqrt{2} , 0}^t + \ZZ\ts{1, 0}^t \), which are not linearly independent over $\RR$.
  This yields a dense set of points on the real axis in $\RR^2$, and is still a free abelian group of rank 2.
  We'll see later that no lattice can be dense, and in fact they must always be discrete.

:::

:::{.remark}
It may not be obvious that a lattice has a uniquely determined number of generating elements.
This turns out to be true: if \( \Lambda = \sum_{i=1}^d  \ZZ \vector v_i \) with \( \ts{ \vector{v}_i }_{i=1}^d \) linearly independent over $\RR$, then \( \Lambda\tensor_\ZZ \RR \cong \sum_{i=1}^d \RR \vector v_i \cong \RR^d \), which is now an $\RR\dash$vector vector space of real dimension $d$.
Noting that $\dim_\RR(\Lambda\tensor_\ZZ \RR)$ doesn't depend on the choice of basis, any different choice of generating set for \( \Lambda \) must have the same number of generators.
:::

:::{.definition title="Full Lattices"}
If $d=n$, we'll call \( \Lambda \) a **full lattice**.
:::

:::{.definition title="Fundamental Parallelepiped"}
Note that if \( \Lambda \) is full, then \( \Lambda= \sum_{i=1}^n \ZZ \vector{v}_i \) with the $\vector v_i$ linearly independent over $\RR$.
We define the **fundamental parallelepiped** as the set
\[
\ts{ \sum_{i=1}^n c_n \vector v_n \st 0 \leq c_i \leq 1} 
.\]
Note that this depends on the choice of generating set.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
For $\vector v_1 = \tv{1, 1}^t$ and $\vector v_2 = \tv{1, 3}$, we get the parallelogram shown in the earlier figure.
Note that \( \Lambda \) is also generated by \( \vector v_1 = \ts{1, 1}, \vector w_2 = \tv{0, 2} \), but this generates a different parallelepiped:

\begin{tikzpicture}
  \draw[thin,gray!40] (-1,-1) grid (4,4);
  \draw[<->] (-1,0)--(4,0) node[right]{$x$};
  \draw[<->] (0,-1)--(0,4) node[above]{$y$};
  \draw[line width=1pt,blue,-stealth](0,0)--(1,1) node[anchor=south west]{$\vector v_1$};
  \draw[line width=1pt,purple,-stealth](1,1)--(2,4) node[anchor=south west]{};
  \draw[line width=1pt,purple,-stealth](0,0)--(1,3) node[anchor=south east]{$\vector v_2$};
\draw[line width=1pt,blue,-stealth](1,3)--(2,4) node[anchor=south west]{};

\draw[line width=1pt,green,-stealth](0,0)--(0,2) node[anchor=south east]{$\vector w_2$};

\draw [draw=black, fill=purple, opacity=0.4]
       (0,0) -- (1,1) -- (2,4) -- (1,3) -- cycle;

\draw [draw=black, fill=green, opacity=0.2]
       (0,0) -- (1,1) -- (1,3) -- (0,2) -- cycle;
\end{tikzpicture}

:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
In general, one gets a parallelotope whose volume is an invariant of the lattice itself.
:::

:::{.proof title="of proposition"}
How do we compute this?
Let $M_v = \tv{ \vector v_1^t, \cdots, \vector v_n^t}$ be the linear transformation obtained by placing all of the generating vectors into the columns of a matrix, and consider scaling the unit cube $C = [0, 1]^n$.
Then letting $P$ be the fundamental parallelepiped, we have $P = M_v C$ and so
\[
\vol(P) = \vol(M_v C) = \abs{ \det(M_v) } \vol(C) = \det(M_v)
,\]
using that the volume of the standard cube is 1.
So it suffices to check that if $\vector v_i$ and $\vector w_j$ generate the same lattice \( \Lambda \), then $\det M_v = \det M_w$.
Why is this true?
If they generate the same lattice, every $\vector v_i$ is a $\ZZ\dash$linear combination of the $\vector w_j$, and similarly every $\vector w_j$ can be written as a linear combination of the $\vector v_i$.
So we get 
\[
M_v = M_w A
\qquad 
M_w = M_v A'
\]
for some matrices $A, A'$.
We can thus write 
\[
M_v = M_vA' A
.\].
Since the $\vector v_i$ are linearly independent, $M_v$ is invertible, so right-multiplying yields $AA' = I$ and taking determinants yields 
\[
1 = \det(A')\det(A)
.\]
Noting that $A, A' \in \Mat(n\times n, \ZZ)$, their determinants must be integers, which forces $\det(A) = \det(A') = \pm 1$.
Taking determinants in the original equation yields
\[
\det(M_v) = \det(A) \det(M_w) = \pm \det(M_w)
,\]
and taking absolute values yields the result.
:::

:::{.definition title="Covolume of a Lattice"}
We'll call the common value $\abs{\det M_v}$ for any choice of generating set \( \ts{ \vector v_i } \) the **covolume** of \( \Lambda \):
\[
\covol( \Lambda) \da \abs{ \det M_v }
.\]
:::

:::{.theorem title="Minkowski (Version 2)"}
Let \( \Lambda \) be a full lattice in $\RR^n$, and let $R \subseteq \RR^n$ be a region that is convex and symmetric about zero.
Assume that 
\[
\vol(R) > 2^n \covol( \Lambda)
.\]
Then $R$ contains a nonzero $\vector v \in \Lambda$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Taking \( \Lambda\da \ZZ^n \) recovers the first version.
Idea of proof: any full lattice is the image of the standard lattice under some linear transformation.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $\vector v_1, \cdots, \vector v_n$ be $n$ generators for \( \Lambda \), then define a linear transformation
\[
T: \RR^n &\to \RR^n \\
\vector v_i &\mapsto \vector e_i
,\]
which takes each generator to the corresponding standard basis vector.
The $T \Lambda = \ZZ^n$ is the standard lattice, and 
\[
\vol (T(R)) = \abs{ \det(T) } \vol(R) = {\vol(R) \over \covol( \Lambda) } > 2^n
,\]
noting that $T\inv = \tv{\vector v_1^t, \cdots, \vector v_n^t}$.
Now applying the original Minkowski theorem we get a nonzero point 
\[
\vector x\in \ZZ^n \intersect T(R)
\implies T\inv \vector x \in \Lambda \intersect R
.\]
:::

### Application: The 4 Square Theorem


:::{.theorem title="4 Square Theorem (Lagrange)"}
Every positive integer is a sum of 4 squares of integers.
:::


:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let $m \in \ZZ^{>0}$  be squarefree, then there are $A, B \in \ZZ$ such that
\[
A^2 + B^2 + 1 \equiv 0 \mod m
,\]
i.e. $-1$ is always the sum of two squares in the ring $\ZZ/m$.
:::



:::{.proof title="?"}
We're trying to solve an equation $\mod m$, and by the CRT it suffices to solve it for every prime power dividing $m$, and since $m$ is squarefree, all prime powers occur with exponent 1.
So it suffices to consider $m=p$ a prime.

:::
























