# Chapter 11: Prime Producing Polynomials and Unique Factorization (Tuesday, February 23)

18th century observation by Euler about the following polynomial:
\[
f(x) \da x^2 -x + 41 
.\]
Goldbach proved that it's impossible for any polynomial $g\in \ZZ[x]$ to have *every* output prime.
Euler noted that this $f$ produces quite a few: for $x=1, \cdots, 40$, the output $f(x)$ is prime, but $f(41) = 41^2 - 41 + 41 = 41^2$ is not.
Let's define a variant: for $q$ a positive integer, set
\[
f_q(x) \da x^2 - x + q
.\]
Note that $f_q(q) = q^2$, so eventually the output is composite.
We'll say $f_q$ is **optimal** if $f_q(x)$ is prime for all integers $0 < x < q$.
As an example, $q=41$ was optimal.


:::{.theorem title="Rabonowitch"}
Let $q \geq 2 \in \ZZ^{> 0}$ and let $d = \Delta(f_q) = 1-4q$ be the discriminant of $f_q$.
Assume that $d$ is squarefree, then $f_q$ is optimal if and only if $\zadjoin{ {1 + \sqrt{d}\over 2 }}$ is a UFD.
[^actual_ring_of_ints]

[^actual_ring_of_ints]: 
Note that this is equal to $\ZZ_K$ when $K\da \QQ( \sqrt{d} )$.

:::


:::{.example title="?"}
For $q=41, d = -163$ and thus $\zadjoin{ {1 + \sqrt{-163} \over 2}}$ is a UFD.
:::


:::{.remark}
The forward direction is harder here.
:::


:::{.proof title="$\impliedby$"}
Assume \( \zadjoin{ \tau } \) is a UFD, where \( \tau\da {1 + \sqrt{d} \over 2 } \).
Toward a contradiction, suppose $f_q(x)$ is composite for some $0<x<q$.
We can write
\[
f_q(x) = x^2 - x + q = (x - \tau)( x - \conjugate{ \tau} ) = \min_{ \tau}(x)_{/\QQ}
.\]
By considering how this function increases, we can conclude $1<q<f_q(x) < f_q(q) = q^2$.
Let $p$ be the least prime factor of $f_q(x)$, which is necessarily bounded by $\sqrt{ f_q(x) }$, so $p<q$.
Since $p\divides f_q(x)$, we have $x\in \ZZ$ as a root of $f\mod p$. 
So $\min_\tau$ has a root modulo $p$.
Recall that studying how \( \gens{ p }  \) factors into ideals of \( \ZZ_K \) involved studying how \( \min_\tau \) factors mod $p$.
Since we've shown it has a root mod $p$, it breaks into two linear factors.
So \( \gens{ p } = P_1 P_2  \) as prime ideals of norm $p$.
By assumption, $\zadjoin[\tau]$ is a UFD and the ring of integers of a number field, and by an earlier theorem, is thus also a PID (noting that this is not generally the case).
So $P_1, P_2$ are principal, and we can write 
\[
P_1 = \gens{ a + b \tau }\implies p = N(p_1) = N( a + b \tau) = a^2 + ab + qb^2
.\]
Completing the square yields
\[
\cdots = (a + b/2)^2 + (q-1/4)b^2
.\]
Note that $b\neq 0$, since this would yield $p = a^2$ in the first equation and $a, p \in \ZZ$ with $p$ prime.
So both terms in the second equation are non-negative, and the second is positive because $b>1$, so $p \geq q- 1/4$.
Since $p, q\in \ZZ$ we can strengthen this to $p \geq q$.
But $p$ was the *least* prime factor of $f_q(x) < q^2$ which was composite, so this is a contradiction.
$\contradiction$

> Big idea: uses that $\min_\tau(x) = f_q(x)$ and remembering that how $\min_\tau(x) \mod p$ factors is exactly how \( \gens{ p }  \) factors into prime ideals.

:::


:::{.proof title="$\implies$"}
We'll prove something stronger.
Assume $f_q(x)$ is prime whenever
\[
1 \leq x \leq {1\over 2} \sqrt{ \abs{d} \over 3 } + {1 \over 2}
,\]
then we'll prove that $\ZZ_K$ is a PID and hence a UFD.
Note that this is stronger because the range is smaller than $0<x<q$.


:::{.claim}
$p$ is inert for all $p \leq \sqrt{ \abs{d}\over 3 }$ (so the prime ideal \( \gens{ p }  \) remains prime).
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
If not, $\min_\tau$ has a root $\mod p$.
Recalling that \( \min_\tau(x) = f_q(x) = x^2 - x + q \), if this has one root then it has two which sum to $-b = -(-1) = 1$, where one of them satisfies 
\[
1 \leq x \leq {1\over 2} \sqrt{ \abs{d} \over 3 } + {1\over 2}
.\]
Why?
If the other root $x = r$ with $1<r<p$ doesn't satisfy this, then the first root is $p+1-r$ and will satisfy this.
Then $p\divides f_q(x)$, but this is a problem!
This forces 
\[
p = f_q(x) = x^2 - x + q \geq q > \sqrt{\abs{d}/3 } \geq p
.\]
This contradicts $f_q(x)$ being prime.
$\contradiction$

:::

So assuming $f_q(x)$ is prime for $1 \leq x \leq {1 \over 2 } \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 } + {1 \over 2}$, we showed that every "small" prime up to \( \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 } \) is inert.
Suppose $P$ is a prime ideal above $p$, then since $p$ is inert, $P = \gens{ p }$ is generated by a prime.
But we'll just use a slightly weaker conclusion: $P$ is principal.


:::{.theorem title="When the class group is generated by small primes"}
Let $d$ be a negative squarefree integer with $d \equiv 1 \mod 4$ (such as the $d$ we are looking at).
Then $\Cl(\ZZ_K)$ is generated as a group by $[P]$ where $P$ runs over all prime ideals above primes $p \leq \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 }$.
:::

Given this theorem, we are done:
in our situation, all such $[P]$ are trivial in the class group since they are principal, which makes $\Cl(\ZZ_K) = 1$ and every ideal is principal.
:::


:::{.remark}
It just remains to prove the above theorem.
We'll use the following:
:::

:::{.proposition title="Almost Euclidean Domains"}
Take the same assumptions on $d$ as above.
Then for each $\theta \in K = \QQ( \sqrt{d} )$, there is a positive integer $t \leq \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 }$ and a $\xi \in \ZZ_K$ with norm \( N(t\theta - \xi) < 1 \).

:::

:::{.remark}
This is slightly technical.
In words: for any element in your quadratic field, you can approximate it by an *integer* of your field, possibly after a small $t$ dilation.
Note that we saw a similar condition for the Euclidean algorithm, namely that $t=1$ always sufficed.
:::

:::{.proof title="of proposition"}
Write \( \theta = a + b \tau \) where we don't necessarily know $\theta \in \ZZ_K$ (although this would make the statement trivial), but $a, b \in \QQ$.
We want to find an appropriate $t$ where $\xi \da A+ B \tau$ for $A, B \in \ZZ$.
Multiplying the inequality out using the definition of the norm results in 
\[
\qty{ (ta - A) + \qty{tb - B \over 2} }^2
+ \abs{d} \qty{ tb - B \over 2 }^2<1
.\]
We'll start by making the second term small by making $tb$ close to an integer (where $b$ is fixed) and choosing $B$ to be that closest integer.
We can choose $t \leq \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 }$ with $\norm{tb} < 1 / \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 }$, where the norm is the distance to the nearest integer.
Why can we do this?
This is Dirichlet's approximation theorem, where we could choose $t\leq N$ such that this norm was bounded by $1/(N+1)$, and we can take $N \da \floor{ \sqrt{\abs{d}\over 3 } }$.
How do we choose $A, B$?
Choose $B$ such that $\norm{tb}$ satisfies the above inequality to obtain 
\[
B\in \ZZ,\quad \abs{tb - B}< 1 / \sqrt{\abs{d}/3 }  
.\]
Then considering the second term in the original equation, we get
\[
\abs{d} \qty{ tb -B \over 2 }^2 < \abs{d}\qty{1\over 4}\qty{1 \over \abs{d}/3} = {3\over 4} 
,\]
so it suffices now to choose $A$ such that the first term is bounded by $1/4$.
Why can we do this?
We have control over $A$, so we can simply choose it freely to shift the inner quantity into the interval $[-1/2, 1/2]$, i.e. 
\[
\abs { ta - A + \qty{tb- B \over 2} } \leq {1\over 2}
,\]
and then squaring yields the desired bound.

:::


:::{.proof title="of theorem"}
We have  \equiv 1 \mod 4$ and we want to show that the class group is generated by small primes $p\leq D\da \sqrt{ \abs{d} / 3 }$.
Let $ be a nonzero ideal of $\ZZ_K$, we'll find a nonzero ideal $ such that $[I] = [J]$ and $ is a product of primes above $ (which have the appropriate upper bound).
In this case, $[J]$ and thus $[I]$ will factor as the product of those primes, and is thus in the subgroup generated by small primes.
Fix \( \beta\in I \) nonzero of minimal norm.


:::{.claim}
For any \( \alpha \in I \) there is a $t\leq D$ with \( \gens{ t \alpha } \in \gens{ \beta }   \).
:::


:::{.remark}
How to think about this:
when the field is Euclidean with respect to the norm, it is a PID.
How do you find generators? 
By taking a nonzero element \( \beta \) of minimal norm in the ideal.
Then any element of $I$ would be in \( \beta \).
Here we have an almost-Euclidean property, where elements of $I$ can be hit with a small dilation to land in this principal ideal.
:::



:::














