# Ch. 18: Dirichlet's Units Theorem Part I (Friday, May 21)

:::{.remark}
Some notation introduced last time: for $K$ a number field, $[K: \QQ] = n$ the degree, set $\sigma_{1}, \cdots, \sigma_{r_1}$ to be the real embeddings, and $\sigma_{r_1 + 1}, \cdots, \sigma_{r_1 + r_2}$ (along with their complex conjugates) to be the nonreal embeddings into $\CC$.
Let $\mu_K \da \ts{ z\in K \st z^n = 1, n\in \NN }$ be the $n$th roots of unity
Recall Dirichlet's unit theorem: there are $\elts{\eps}{r_1+r_2-1} \in \ZZ_K\units$ of infinite order such that
\[
\ZZ_K\units = \mu_K \times \prod_{i\leq r_1 + r_2 -1} \gens{ \mu_i } 
.\]
Moreover, $\# \mu_K < \infty$.
:::

:::{.remark title="An outline of the proof"}
Set $d = r_1 + r_2$.
We define a homomorphism
\[
\Log: K\units &\to \RR^{d} \\
\alpha &\mapsto \tv{ 
\log\abs{\sigma_i(\alpha)}, 
\cdots,
\log\abs{\sigma_{r_1}(\alpha)}, 
2 \log\abs{\sigma_{r_1+1}(\alpha)}, 
\cdots,
2 \log\abs{\sigma_{r_1+r_2}(\alpha)}, 
}
.\]
Note that we only used half of the non-real embeddings, but made up for it by including a 2!
We'll mostly be concerned with its restriction to $\ZZ_K\units$.


1. Show that the restriction has finite kernel $\mu_k$. Check.

2. Show $\Log(\ZZ_K\units)$ is discrete as a subgroup of $\RR^{d}$

3. Use the fact that every discrete subgroup of $\RR^d$ is a lattice, the $\ZZ\dash$span of linearly independent vectors.


4. Prove the units theorem with $d-1$ replaced by $g = \rank \Log(\ZZ_K\units)$.

5. Deferred to next chapter: show $g = r_1 + r_2 - 1$.

:::

## Step 2: Discreteness

:::{.definition title="?"}
Let $d\in \ZZ^{\geq 0}$ and let $\Lambda \leq \RR^d$ be a subgroup.
Then $\Lambda$ is **discrete** iff for every $R>0$, $\Lambda \intersect B_R(0)$ is a finite set, where $B_R(0)$ is a ball of radius $R$ about 0.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
$\Log(\ZZ_K\units)$ is discrete in $\RR^d$ for $d=r_1 + r_2$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $R>0$, we'll show that there are only finitely many $\alpha \in \ZZ_K\units$ for which $\Log(\alpha) \in B_R(0)$.
This forces $\log\abs{\sigma(\alpha)} \leq R$ for all $\sigma: K\embeds \CC$.
Thus $\abs{\sigma(\alpha)} \leq e^R$ for all such embeddings.
By a previous lemma, this makes $\alpha$ a root of a polynomial in some finite set $P_{n,e^R}$ -- what this set is isn't important, just recall that once you have a bound on the embeddings, this gives a bound on the coefficients of the field polynomial.
:::

## Step 3

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Every discrete subgroup of $\RR^d$ is a lattice.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
See the book!
:::

## Step 3

:::{.theorem title="Weak units theorem"}
Let $g$ be the rank of $\Log\ZZ_K\units \subseteq \RR^{r_1 + r_2}$.
Then there are fundamental units \( \elts{\eps}{g} \in \ZZ_K\units \) of infinite order such that
\[
\ZZ_K\units = \mu_K \times \prod_{i\leq g} \gens{ \eps_i } 
.\]
Note that this is the same theorem from before, just with $d$ replaced by $g$.

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Using that $g$ is by definition the rank of the lattice $\Log\ZZ$, choose $\elts{\eps}{g}\in \ZZ_K\units$ such that the $\Log(\eps_i)$ are $\RR\dash$linearly independent and their $\ZZ\dash$span is the lattice.
Let $\eps\in \ZZ_K\units$ be any unit, then $\Log(\eps) \in \Log\ZZ_K\units$, so there are integers $\elts{n}{g}\in \ZZ$ such that 
\[

\Log(\eps) = \sum n_i \Log(\eps_i)
.\]
Hence
\[
\Log\qty{ \eps / \prod_{i\leq g} \eps_i^{n_i} } = \vector 0
.\]
So it's in the kernel and equal to some $\zeta\in \mu_K$, so we can write $\eps = \zeta \prod_{i\leq g} \eps_i^{n_i}$.
This representation of $\eps$ is unique, in the sense that $\zeta$ and the $n_i$ are uniquely determined.
Why?
For any other representation, applying $\Log$ would kill the $\zeta$ part and write $\Log(\eps) = \sum n_{j} \eps_j$ in the basis $\eps_j$.
So the $n_i$ are unique, and $\zeta$ is just obtained by dividing, so it can be recovered uniquely as well.
:::



:::{.remark}
Our goal is to now show $g=r_1 + r_2-1$, which is hard.
It's easier to obtain a bound instead.
:::


:::{.proposition title="Lattice rank bound"}
Let $g = \rank \Log(\ZZ_K\units)$, then
\[
g\leq r_1 + r_2 - 1
.\]
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let $\Lambda \subseteq \RR^d$ be a lattice, then $\rank \Lambda = \dim_\RR V$ where $V$ is the smallest subspace of $\RR^d$ containing $\Lambda$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $g\da \rank \Lambda$, and write \( \Lambda= \sum_{i\leq g} \ZZ \vector v_i \) where the $\vector v_i$ are $\RR\dash$linearly independent. 
Then $V = \sum_{i\leq g} \RR \vector v_i$, and $\dim_\RR V = g = \rank \Lambda$.
:::


:::{.proof title="of proposition, lattice rank bound"}
Let $\vector w = \tv{1, 1, \cdots, 1}\in \RR^{r_1 + r_2}$.
If \( \alpha\in \ZZ_K\units \), then dotting sums the components, so
\[
\vector w \cdot \Log \alpha = \sum_{i\leq r_1} \log \abs{\sigma_i( \alpha)}
+ 2\sum_{r_1 + 1 \leq i \leq r_1 + r_2} \log \abs{\sigma_i( \alpha) }
.\]
Note that $\abs{\sigma_i(\alpha)} = \abs{\bar{\sigma( \alpha)}}$, so because we have a 2 here, we could have written this as
\[
\vector w \cdot \Log \alpha = \sum_{\sigma:K\injects \CC}
.\]



:::








