# Ch. 20 Continued (Friday, May 21)


:::{.remark}
Goal of Ch.18: prove that units theorem where the rank is left unspecified, and we proved it for $g$ the rank of a certain lattice.
For Ch.20, we want to show $g$ is the right number!
Recall the $\Log: K\units\to \RR^{r_1 + r_2}$ where we take the $\log\abs{\wait}$ of the real embeddings and $2\log\abs{\wait}$ of one of each pair of complex embeddings.
We know $\Log\ZZ_K\units \subseteq \RR^{r_1 + r_2}$ is a lattice of rank $g \leq r_1 + r_2 - 1$, and we want to show equality.
We showed that everything follows if we establish the key lemma: if $c_1, \cdots, c_{r_1 + r_2 - 1} \in \RR$ are not all zero, defin
\[
F(\alpha) \da \tv{c_1, \cdots, c_{r_1 + r_2 - 1}, 0} \cdot \Log(\alpha)
.\]
We want to show there is a sequence of $\alpha\in \ZZ_K$ such that $\abs{F(\alpha)} \to \infty$ with $\abs{N( \alpha)} \leq C_1$ bounded, where $C_1$ doesn't depend on $\alpha$.
We want to make the dot product above large while keeping the norms small while making linear combinations of $\log\abs{\sigma_i( \alpha)}$ large.
The only embeddings that show up are the ones labeled up to $r_1 + r_2 - 1$, since the last component is zero, and we'll show that we can essentially control the image of $\alpha$ under these embeddings while keeping its norm bounded.

Recall the Minkowski embedding realizes $K$ as a subspace of Euclidean space: $\iota: K\to \RR^{r_1} \oplus \CC^{r_2}$ where the first components are the first $r_1$ real embeddings and the latter are the complex embeddings.
Identifying the target with $\RR^n$, we said last time that $\iota(\ZZ_K) \subseteq \RR^n$ is a full rank lattice, so of rank $n$, which thus has a finite nonzero covolume.

We'll use this with Minkowski's convex body theorem: suppose $R$ is a region in $\RR^d$ which is centrally symmetric and convex, and $\Lambda$ is a full rank lattice in $\RR^d$.
Then if $\vol(R)> w^d \covol(\Lambda)$, $R$ contains a nonzero point $x\in \Lambda$.
How we'll use these: apply s the convex body theorem on $\Lambda = \iota(\ZZ_K)$, and use this to locate the types of $\alpha$ we want.
:::


:::{.remark}
Given \( \lambda_1, \cdots, \lambda_{r_1 + r_2} \in \RR^{\geq 0} \), denote this by the vector $\vector \lambda$.
Define
\[
R_{\vector \lambda}\da \ts{ \tv{x_1, \cdots, x_{r_1 + r_2}} \in \RR^{r_1} \oplus \CC^{r_2} \st \abs{x_i} \leq \lambda_i\,\,\forall i  } \subseteq \RR^{r_1} \oplus \CC^{r_2} \cong \RR^{n}
.\]
This is clearly centrally symmetric: negating anything lands in the region since we're taking absolute values.
It's less clearly convex, but this follows from the triangle inequality.
More intuitively, it's a product of discs and boxes, each of which are convex.
One can compute its volume as 
\[
\vol R_{\vector \lambda} = \prod_{i\leq r_1} 2\lambda_i \prod_{j\leq r_2} \pi \lambda_{r_1 + j}^2
= 2^{r_1} \pi^{r_2} \prod_{i\leq r_1} \lambda_i \prod_{j\leq r_2} \lambda_{r_1 + j}^2
,\]
since the first $r_1$ components form boxes and the last form discs.

As a convention, we'll fill out $r_1+r_2$ tuples to $r_1 + 2r_2$ tuples in the following way: for $1 \leq i\leq r_2$,  set 

- $\sigma_{r_1 + r_2 + i} = \bar{\sigma_{r_1 + i}}$, a
- $\lambda_{r_1 + r_2 + i} = \lambda_{r_1 + i}$

This introduces the remaining embeddings from each conjugate pair and assigns it the same $\lambda_i$.
We can now write
\[
\vol(\RR_{\vector \lambda} = 2^{r_1}\pi^{r_2} \prod_{i\leq n} \lambda_i
,\]
since each $\lambda$ now appears twice in the product.

:::


:::{.remark}
Rather than working with arbitrary tuples, we'll only consider $\elts{\lambda}{r_1 + r_2} \in \RR^{\geq 0}$ contained such that
\[
\vol R_{\vector \lambda} = 2 \qty{ 2^n \covol \iota(\ZZ_K) }
.\]
This allows one to choose the first $r_1 + r_2-1$ freely, and the last will be determined uniquely.
By Minkowski's theorem, there is an $\alpha\in \ZZ_K$ nonzero with $\iota( \alpha)\in R_{\vector \alpha}$.
Hence
\[
\abs{ \sigma_i( \alpha)} \leq \lambda_i && \forall i=1,2,\cdots, n
.\]



:::



