# Lecture 3 (Thursday, January 21)

Today: roughly corresponds to chapter 3 in the book.
Goal: do all of the big theorems in the setting of quadratic number fields, then redo everything for general number fields.

## Quadratic Number Fields

Simplest case: $\QQ$, a degree 1 number field, so the next simplest case is degree 2.

:::{.definition title="Quadratic Number Fields"}
A field $K$ is a **quadratic number field** if and only if $K$ is a number field and $[K: \QQ] = 2$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Some notation: if $d\in \RR\units$, then $\sqrt d$ means the *positive* square root of $d$ if $d \geq 0$, and if $d<0$ this denotes $i\sqrt{\abs{d}}$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
If $K$ is a quadratic number field, then $K = \QQ(\sqrt{d})$ for some squarefree 
[^note_squarefree]
$d\in \ZZ$.
Moreover, this $d$ is uniquely determined by $K$, so all quadratic number fields are parameterized by the set of squarefree integers.

[^note_squarefree]: 
*Squarefree* means not divisible by $n^2$ for any $n > 1\in \ZZ$, or equivalently not divisible by the square of any primes.

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
**Existence**: 
Since $[K: \QQ] = 2$, we have $K\supsetneq \QQ$ so pick \( \alpha\in K\sm \QQ \) then $K = \QQ(\alpha)$.
Note that we could also furnish this \( \alpha \) from the primitive element theorem, although this is overkill here.
So \( \alpha \) is a root of some degree 2 $p\in \QQ[x]$, and by scaling coefficients we can replace this by $p\in \ZZ[x]$.
So write $p(x) = Ax^2 + Bx + C$, in which case we can always write \( \alpha = {-B \pm \sqrt{B^2 - 4AC} \over 2A} \) where $A\neq 0$ since this would imply that \( \alpha\in\QQ \).
Writing \( \Delta\da B^2 - 4AC \), we have $K = \QQ(\alpha) = \QQ(\sqrt{\Delta})$.
This is close to what we want -- it's $\QQ$ adjoin some integer -- but we'd like it to be squarefree.

Now let $f\in \ZZ^{\geq 0}$ be chosen such that $f^2 \divides \Delta$ and $f$ is as large as possible, i.e. the largest square factor of \( \Delta \).
Writing \( \Delta = f^2 - d \) where $d$ is whatever remains.
Then $d$ must be squarefree, otherwise if $d$ had a square factor bigger than 1, say $d = r^2 d'$, in which case $f^2 r^2 > f^2$ would be a larger factor of \( \Delta \).
So $d$ is squarefree, and \( \Delta = f \sqrt d \) and thus \( \QQ(\Delta) = \QQ(\sqrt{d}) \).

**Uniqueness**: 
Well derive some extra machinery.


:::{.definition title="Norm and Trace"}
Let $K$ be a number field with $K_{/\QQ}$ Galois.
For each \( \alpha\in K \) define
\[
N(\alpha) &\da \prod_{\sigma\in \Gal(K_{/\QQ}) \sigma(\alpha) && \text{the norm} \\
\Tr(\alpha) &\da \sum_{\sigma\in \Gal(K_{/\QQ}) \sigma(\alpha) && \text{the trace}
.\]
:::


:::{.remark}
Why use these kind of sum at all?
Applying any element in the Galois group just permutes the elements.
Note that $N( \alpha), \Tr( \alpha)$ are $G(K_{/\QQ})\dash$invariant, and thus rational numbers in $\QQ$.
The norm is multiplicative, and the trace is additive and in fact $\QQ\dash$linear: $\Tr(a \alpha + b \beta) = a \Tr( \alpha) + b \Tr( \beta)$ for all \( \alpha, \beta\in K \) and all \( a,b \in \QQ \).
:::

What do the norm and trace look like for a quadratic field?
We can write $K = \ts{a + b \sqrt d \st a,b \in \QQ}$ and there is a unique (non-identity) element \( g\in \Gal(K_{/\QQ}) \) with \( \sigma(a + b \sqrt d = a - b \sqrt{d} \).
We'll refer to this automorphism as **conjugation**.
We can compute
\[
N(a + b \sqrt{d} ) &= a^2 - db^2 \\
\Tr(a + b \sqrt{d} ) &= 2a
.\]

Returning to the proof, suppose otherwise that $K = \QQ(\sqrt{d_1} ) = \QQ ( \sqrt{d_2} )$ with $d_1\neq d_2$ squarefree integers.
Note that they must have the same sign, otherwise one of these extensions would not be a subfield of $\RR$.
We know \( \sqrt{d_1} \in \QQ( \sqrt{d_2} ) \) and thus \( \sqrt{d_1} = a + b \sqrt{d_2} \) for some $a, b\in \QQ$.
Taking the trace of both sides, the LHS is zero and the RHS is $2a$ and we get $a=0$ and \( \sqrt{d_1} = b \sqrt{d_2} \).
Write $b = u/v$ with $u,v\in \QQ$.
Squaring both sides yields $v^2 d_1 = u^2 d_2$.
Let $p$ be a prime dividing $d_1$; then since $d_1$ is squarefree there is only one copy of $p$ occurring in its factorization.
Moreover there are an even number of copies of $p$ coming from $v^2$, thus forcing $d_2$ to have an odd power of $p$.
This forces $p\divides d_2$, and since this holds for every prime factor $p$ of $d_1$, we get $d_1 \divides d_2$ since $d_1$ is squarefree.
The same argument shows that $d_2 \divides d_1$, so they're the same up to sign: but the signs must match and we get $d_1 = d_2$.

:::

Note that this results holds for every squarefree number not equal to 1.


:::{.question}
If $K = \QQ( \sqrt{d} )$, what is the ring of integers $\ZZ_K$?
Some more machinery will help here.
:::

:::{.definition title="The Field Polynomial of an Element"}
Assume $K_{/\QQ}$ is a Galois number field and for \( \alpha\in K \) define 
\[
\varphi_{\alpha}(x) \da \prod_{ \sigma\in \Gal(K_{/\QQ})} \qty{ x - \sigma(\alpha)}
.\]

:::

:::{.remark}
For the same reasons mentioned for the norm/trace, we get \( \varphi_{\alpha} \in \QQ[x] \), and moreover \( \varphi_{ \alpha } (\alpha) = 0 \).
:::

When is \( \alpha\in \ZZ_K \)? 
We have the following criterion:


:::{.proposition title="?"}
\[
\alpha\in \ZZ_K \iff \varphi_{ \alpha } (x) \in \ZZ[x]
.\]

:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
$\impliedby$:
This is easy, since if \( \varphi_\alpha \) is a monic polynomial with integer coefficients, meaning that \( \alpha \) is an algebraic integer and thus in $\ZZ_K$.

$\implies$:
If \( \alpha \in \ZZ_K \) then it's the root of some monic polynomial in $\ZZ[x]$, and the same is true for \( \sigma(\alpha) \) and thus each \( \sigma(\alpha) \in \bar\ZZ \).
So \( \varphi_{ \alpha}(x) \in \bar \ZZ[x] \).
We said \( \varphi_{ \alpha} \) has coefficients in $\QQ$ too, and thus in $\bar \ZZ \intersect \QQ = \ZZ$.
:::







