# Ch. XYZ: Galois Theory and Prime Decomposition (April 13)

:::{.remark}
Two recommended resources:

- Samuel, Algebraic Theory of Numbers (Dover)
- Matt Baker's [online notes on Algebraic number theory](https://people.math.gatech.edu/~mbaker/pdf/ANTBook.pdf).

:::

:::{.remark}
Setup:

- $L/K$ a Galois extension of number fields.
- $P \in \mspec K$
- $Q\in \mspec L$

We saw that $G(L/K)$ acts on the prime ideals above $P$, making all of the $e,f$ values the same, and thus the decomposition into prime ideals in this type of extension is simpler than in a general extension.
We'll look at decomposition and inertia groups today.

Recall that if $Q$ lies above $P$, then the **decomposition group** $D(Q/P)$ is the set of $\sigma\in G(L/K)$ such that $\sigma(Q) = Q$.
Note that $P$ is redundant in this notation, since $Q \intersect \ZZ_K = P$.
Also recall that $\FF_Q \da \ZZ_L/Q$ is the residue field associated to $Q$ and $\ZZ_P \da \ZZ_L/P$ and we view $\FF_P \subseteq \FF_Q$.
Such an extension of finite fields is always Galois, and the Galois groups turn out to be related to the decomposition groups.
For $\sigma \in D(Q/P)$ we defined $\bar\sigma: \FF_Q \to \FF_Q$ where $\alpha \mod Q \mapsto \sigma(\alpha) \mod Q$.
It's easy to check this is 

- Well-defined, precisely by the definition of $D(Q/P)$, 

- An automorphism of $\FF_Q$: it must be surjective since everything in $\ZZ_L$ is in the image of $\sigma$ since $\sigma$ was an automorphism of $\ZZ_L$ to begin with.
  But then it's a surjective morphism from a finite field to itself, hence an automorphism.
- $\sigma$ fixed $\FF_P$ pointwise
  Now consider applying $\sigma$ to an element of $\FF_P$, which are of the form $\alpha \mod Q$ where $\alpha$ comes from $\ZZ_K$.
  But $\sigma$ fixed $\ZZ_K$ pointwise, so $\sigma$ fixed $\FF_P$ pointwise.

So each $\sigma\in D(Q/P)$ yields a $\bar\sigma \in G(\FF_Q/\FF_P)$ and we get a group morphism
\[
\red_{Q/P}: D(Q/P) &&\to G(\FF_Q/\FF_P) \\
\sigma &\mapsto \bar\sigma
.\]
The following is the deeper and more important fact about this morphism, which requires a technical proof:
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
$\red_{Q/P}$ is surjective.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
We can assume $\FF_P$ is a proper subfield of $\FF_Q$, since the result follows immediately otherwise.
By the primitive element theorem, since $|FF_Q/\FF_P$ is separable we can write $\FF_Q = \FF_P(\bar\alpha)$ where $\alpha\in \ZZ_L$ and $\bar{\wait}$ denotes reducing mod $Q$.
Note $\alpha\not\in Q$, since this would mean $\bar\alpha = 0$ and thus $\FF_Q = \FF_P$.
On the other hand, we can assume $\alpha\in Q'$ for all other $Q'\neq Q$ above $P$.
Why?
Sketch: the equation $\FF_Q = \FF_P(\bar\alpha)$ only depends on $\alpha\mod Q$, so if $\alpha$ is not in some $Q'$, just adjust $\alpha$ modulo $Q'$ without affecting its class mod $Q$ to get a new $\alpha$ in $Q'$.
So if not, replace $\alpha$ with $\alpha'$ satisfying
\[
\alpha' \cong \alpha \mod Q \\
\alpha'\cong 0 \mod Q' && \forall Q'\neq Q \text{ above }P
.\]

Look at the minimal polynomial $\bar m(x)$ of $\bar\alpha$ over $\FF_P$, some monic polynomial in $\FF_P[x]$, where $\FF_P$ is the reduction mod $P$ of elements in $\ZZ_K$.
So we can think of $\bar m(x)$ as some $m(x) \in \ZZ_K[x]$ whose coefficients have been reduced mod $Q$.
We'll show that for each root $r$ of $\bar m(x)$ in $\FF_Q$, there is some $\sigma\in D(Q/P)$ such that $\bar\sigma(\bar\alpha) = r$
This is enough, since any automorphism of $\FF_Q$ fixing $\FF_P$ is determined by the image of $\bar\alpha$, which has to go to some other root of $\bar m (x)$.
If we can show this statement, this means that $\bar\sigma$ has to hit every automorphism in $G(\FF_Q/\FF_P)$.

Define $g(x) = \prod_{\sigma\in G(L/K)} (x- \sigma( \alpha))$.
Where does $g$ live?
$\alpha$ came from $L$, so $\sigma( \alpha) \in L$, and multiplying over all $\sigma$ puts the coefficients in $K$.
Even better, since $\alpha\in \ZZ_L$ is algebraic, this will have $\ZZ_K$ coefficients, so $g\in \ZZ_K[x]$.
Now reduce mod $Q$ to get $\bar g(x) \in \FF_P[X]$, and moreover $\bar g(\bar \alpha) = \bar{g(\alpha)} = 0$ in $\FF_Q$, since $g(\alpha) = 0$ by definition since one $\sigma$ in the product is the identity.

:::






