# Lecture 2 (Tuesday, January 19)

Today: Ch.2 of the book, "Cast of Characters".
Note that all rings will be commutative and unital in this course.

Last time: looked at factorization in $\ZZ[\sqrt 2], \ZZ[\sqrt{26}]$. 
Where do rings like this come from?


:::{.definition title="Number Field"}
A **number field** is a subfield $K \subseteq \CC$ such that $[K: \QQ] < \infty$.
:::


:::{.remark}
Some authors don't require $K \subseteq \CC$, but any finite extension of $\QQ$ will embed into $\CC$ so there's no harm in this extra requirement.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
$\QQ[\sqrt[3]{2}, \QQ[\sqrt 2, \sqrt[5]{7}]$ or $\QQ(\theta)$ where $\theta$ is a root of $x^5 - x - 1$ (which you can check is irreducible.
Now that the round vs. square brackets here won't make a difference, since we're adjoining algebraic numbers.
:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $K_{/\QQ}$ be a finite extension, say of degree $n\da [K: \QQ]$.
Then there are $n$ distinct embeddings
[^embedding_means]
of $K$ into $\CC$

[^embedding_means]: 
An injective ring morphism.

:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
We have $K_{/\QQ}$, which is necessarily separable since $\ch(\QQ) = 0$.
By the primitive element theorem, we can write $K = \QQ(\theta)$ where \( \theta \) is a root of some degree $n$ irreducible polynomial $f(x) \in \QQ[x]$.
Since $\CC$ is algebraically closed, $f$ splits completely over $\CC$ as \( f = \prod_{i=1}^n (x- \theta_i \) which each \( \theta_i \in CC \) distinct since $f$ was irreducible and we're in characteristic zero.
Then for each $i$ there is an embedding $K = \QQ[\theta]$ given by
\[
\iota_i: \QQ[\theta] &\injects \CC \\
g(\theta) &\mapsto g(\theta_i)
.\]
There are some easy things to check:

- This is well-defined: elements in $K$ are polynomials in \( \theta \) but they all differ by a multiple of the minimal polynomial of \( \theta \),
- This is an inject homomorphism and thus an embedding, and
- For distinct $i$ you get distinct embeddings: just look at the image $\iota_i(\theta)$, these are distinct numbers in $\CC$.

:::


:::{.definition title="Real and Nonreal embeddings"}
Let $K_{/\QQ}$ be a finite extension of degree $n = [K : \QQ]$.
We'll say an embedding \( \sigma:K \to \CC \) is **real** if \( \sigma(K) \subseteq \RR \) , otherwise we'll say the embedding is **nonreal**.
:::


:::{.remark}
If \( \sigma \) is a nonreal, then \( \bar \sigma \) is a nonreal embedding, so this embeddings come in pairs.
As a consequence, the total number of embeddings is given by $n = r_1 + 2r_2$, where $r_1$ is the number of real embeddings and $r_2$ is the number of nonreal embeddings.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
Let $K = \QQ(\sqrt[3]{2})$.
Here $n=3$ since this is the root of a degree 3 irreducible polynomial.
Using the proof we can find the embeddings: factor 
\[
x^3 - 2 = (x - \sqrt[3]{2})(x - \omega \sqrt[3]{2}) (x - \omega^2 \sqrt[3]{2})
.\]
where \( \omega = e^{2\pi i / 3} \) is a complex cube root of unity.
We can form an embedding by sending $\sqrt[3]{2} \to \omega^j \sqrt[3]{2}$ for $j=0,1,2$.
The case $j=0$ sends $K$ to a subset of $\RR$ and yields a real embedding, but the other two will be nonreal. 
So $r_1 = 1, r_2 = 1$, and we have $3 = 1 + 2(1)$ and this is consistent.
:::

We've only been talking about fields, since unique factorization is trivial since there are no primes.
There are thus "too many" units, compared to the rings we were considering before, so we'll restrict to subrings.
The question is: where is the arithmetic?
Given a number field $K$, we want a ring $\ZZ_K$ that fits this analogy:


\begin{tikzcd}
\QQ \ar[dd] & \leadsto & K\ar[dd] \\
\\
\ZZ & \leadsto & \ZZ_K = ?
\end{tikzcd}


:::{.definition title="Algebraic Numbers"}
Given \( \alpha\in \CC \) we say \( \alpha \) is an **algebraic number** if and only if \( \alpha \) is algebraic over $\QQ$, i.e. the root of some polynomial in $\QQ[x]$.
:::


:::{.remark}
We know that if we define $\bar \QQ \da \ts{\alpha\in \CC \st \alpha \text{ is algebraic over } \QQ}$, we can alternatively describe this as $\bar \QQ = \ts { \alpha\in \CC \st [\QQ(\alpha) : \QQ] < \infty }$.
This is convenient because it's easy to see that algebraic numbers are closed under sums and products, just using the ways degrees behave in towers.
:::


:::{.corollary title="?"}
$\bar \QQ \injects \CC$ is a subfield and every number field is a subfield of $\bar \QQ$.
:::

These are still fields, so lets define some interesting subrings.


:::{.definition title="?"}
Define $\bar \ZZ \da \ts{ \alpha\in \CC \st \alpha\text{ is the root of a monic polynomial }f\in \ZZ[x]}$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
$\bar \ZZ$ is a ring, and in fact a domain since it's a subring of $\CC$.
:::

We'll use an intermediate criterion to prove this:

:::{.proposition title="Integrality Criterion"}
Let \( \alpha\in \CC \) and suppose there is a finitely generated $\ZZ\dash$submodule of $\CC$ with \( \alpha M \subseteq M \neq 0\).
Then \( \alpha\in \bar \ZZ \), i.e. \( \alpha \) is the root of a monic polynomial with integer coefficients.
:::


:::{.proof title="of integrality criterion"}
Chasing definitions, take $M$ and choose a finite list of generators \( \beta_1, \beta_2, \cdots, \beta_m \) for $M$.
Then \( \alpha M \subseteq M \implies \alpha \beta_i \in M \) for all \( M \), and each \( \alpha \beta_i \) is a $\ZZ\dash$linear combination of the \( \beta_i \) .
I.e. we have
\[
\alpha 
\begin{bmatrix}
\beta_1 
\\
\vdots  
\\
\beta_n  
\end{bmatrix}
= 
\begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} & a_{12} & \cdots
\\
a_{21} &  a_{22} & 
\\
 \vdots &  &\ddots  
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}
\beta_1 
\\
\vdots  
\\
\beta_n  
\end{bmatrix}
\da A \vec{\beta}
,\]
where $A \in \Mat(n\times m, \ZZ)$.
We can rearrange this to say that 
\[
\qty{ \alpha \id - A} 
\begin{bmatrix}
\beta_1 
\\
\vdots  
\\
\beta_n  
\end{bmatrix}
=
\vector{0}
.\]
Not  all of the $\beta_i$ can be zero since $M\neq 0$, and thus \( \alpha \id - A \) is singular and thus has determinant zero, so $\det(x \id - A)\evalfrom_{x=a} = 0$.
We have 
\[
x\id - A = 

\begin{bmatrix}
x - a_{1,} &  & &
\\
&  x - a_{2, 2} & & 
\\
&  & \ddots &
\\
& &  & x - a_{m, m}
\end{bmatrix}
,\]
where the off-diagonal components are constants in $\ZZ$ coming from $A$.
Taking the determinant yields a monic polynomial: the term of leading degree comes from multiplying the diagonal components, and expanding over the remaining minors only yields terms of smaller degree.
So $\det (x\id - A) \in \ZZ[x]$ is monic.

:::


:::{.proof title="of theorem"}
We want to show that \( \bar \ZZ \) is a ring, and it's enough to show that 

- \( 1\in \bar \ZZ \), which is true since $x-1$ is monic.
- It's closed under $+, \cdot$.

Note that the first property generalizes to $\ZZ \subseteq \bar \ZZ$, since $x-n$ is monic for any $n\in \ZZ$.
For the second, let \( \alpha, \beta \in \bar \ZZ \).
Define $M \da \ZZ[\alpha, \beta]$, then it's clear that \( (\alpha + \beta)M \subseteq M \) and \( (\alpha \beta)M \subseteq M \) since $\ZZ[\alpha, \beta]$ are polynomials in \( \alpha, \beta \) and multiplying by these expression still yields such polynomials.
It only remains to check the following:

:::{.claim}
$M$ is finitely-generated.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
Let \( \alpha \) be a root of $f \in \ZZ[x]$ and \( \beta \) a root of $g$, both monic with $\deg f = n, \deg g = m$.
We want to produce a finite generating set for \( M\da \ZZ[\alpha, \beta] \), and the claim is that the following works: \( \ts{ \alpha^i \beta^j} _{\substack{0\leq i < n \\ 0 \leq j < m} } \), i.e. every element of $M$ is some $\ZZ\dash$linear combination of these.

Note that this is clearly true if we were to include $n, m$ in the indices by collecting terms of any polynomial in \( \alpha, \beta \), so the restrictions are nontrivial.
It's enough to show that for any $0 \leq I, J \in \ZZ$, the term \( \alpha^I \beta^J \) is a $\ZZ\dash$linear combination of the restricted elements above.
:::


:::













