# Thursday, February 18

## Ch. 9 Continued

:::{.remark}
Last time: we defined an equivalence relation on nonzero ideals of $\ZZ_K$, namely \( I \approx J \iff I = \alpha J \) for some \( \alpha \in K\units \).
We then defined the **class group**
\[
\Cl(\ZZ_K) \da \Id(\ZZ_K) / \approx
.\]
We saw that ideal multiplication descends to a well-defined group structure on ideal classes. 
Since ideal multiplication is commutative, this is an abelian group, and moreover it is finite.
:::

:::{.example title="Computing the Class Group"}
Let $K = \QQ(d)$ where \( d \da \sqrt{ -5 } \).
We saw that every ideal class is represented by an element with bounded norm.
Applying it to this specific value of $d$, every element is represented by $[I]$ where \( N(I) \leq 6 \).
If we have such an ideal, it will factor into primes, and thus the class will factor into prime classes. 
Thus the group is actually *generated* by prime ideals of norm at most 6.
Any such ideal will lie above a prime $p \leq 6$, so $p=2,3,5$.
We saw
\[
\gens{ 2 } = P_1^2 && P_1 \da \gens{ 2, 1 + \sqrt{-5} } \\
\gens{ 3 } = P_2 P_3 && P_2 \da \gens{ 3, 1 + \sqrt{-5} },\, P_3 \da \gens{ 3, 1 - \sqrt{-5} }    \\
\gens{ 5 } = P_4^2 && P_4 \da \gens{ \sqrt{-5} }.  
.\]
We conclude that \( \Cl(\ZZ_K) = \gens{ P_1, \cdots, P_4 }  \).
What are the relations?
Consider $P_4$, and note that $\gens{ \sqrt{-5} } \approx  \gens{ 1 }$ since \( P_4 = \sqrt{-5} \gens{ 1 }  \). 
A similar argument works for any principal ideal, and we can throw out $P_4$.
Consider $P_2$ and $P_3$.
Since \( \gens{ 3 } \approx \gens{ 1 }   \), we have $P_2 = P_3 \inv$, so we can also throw out $P_2$, since we don't need to include the inverse of a generator.
Recall that there is a factorization
\[
\gens{ 1 - \sqrt{-5} } 
=
\gens{ 2, 1 - \sqrt{-5} } 
\gens{ 3, 1 - \sqrt{-5} }  
= P_1 P_3
\]
and so these are inverses and we can get rid of $P_3$.
So \( \Cl(\ZZ_K) = \gens{ [P_1] } \), which is a cyclic group.
The generator has to have order 1 or 2, since $P_1^2 = \gens{ 1 }$. 
The claim is that the order is 2: otherwise, it would be trivial, making the class group trivial, which would imply that $\ZZ_K$ is a PID.
Why?
This implies that every $I \in \Id(\ZZ_K)$ is dilation equivalent to the unit ideal, so $I = \alpha \gens{ 1 }$ for some \( \alpha\in K\units \). 
But since $I$ is an ideal in $\ZZ_K$, this forces \( \alpha\in \ZZ_K \) and $I = \gens{ \alpha }$. 
This is a contradiction, since every PID is a UFD, and \( \QQ( \sqrt{-5} ) \) has non-unique factorization.
So we can write \( \Cl(\ZZ_K) \cong \GG_a(\ZZ/2\ZZ) \).
:::

:::{.remark}
What is the class group useful for?
We'll tie this into Diophantine equations.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Solve the following equation in $\ZZ$:
\[
y^2 + 5 = x^3
.\]
Recall that we originally tried to do this by factoring the left-hand side and appealing to unique factorization in a number field to deduce that various factors were powers.
However, we don't have unique factorization.
Although we can write \( ( y + \sqrt{-5} ) (y - \sqrt{-5} ) = x^3 \), it's not clear that this is helpful.
The fix will be to go to $\Id(\ZZ_K)$, which does have unique factorization, where we'll also be able to use facts about the class group.
We can turn this into an equation in ideals:
\[
\gens{ y + \sqrt{-5} }  
\gens{ y - \sqrt{-5} }  
= 
\gens{ x }^3 && \in \Id(\ZZ[\sqrt{-5} ]) 
.\]
The original strategy was to show the left-hand factors were coprime in order to deduce they were both cubes.
We'll try to show these ideals are coprime in the monoid sense, then since their product is a cube they'll have to be cubes.
This uses the fact that this is a reduced unique factorization monoid, so being a cube up to a unit is not something we have to worry about here.

:::{.claim}
There is no common prime ideal that divides both factors, using unique factorization.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Suppose toward a contradiction that $P$ is prime and divides both.
Using that ideal norms are multiplicative, $N(P) \divides N( \gens{ y + \sqrt{-5} }) = y^2 + 5$. 
We also know $P$ contains both factors, so it contains $(y + \sqrt{-5} ) - (y - \sqrt{-5} ) = 2 \sqrt{-5}$, so $N(P) \divides N( \gens{ 2 \sqrt{-5} } ) = 20$. 
Thus $N(P) \divides \gcd(y^2 + 5, 20)$ in $\ZZ$.
This is impossible!

- $y$ is necessarily even for the original equation to be true.
  If $y$ is odd, take the equation $\mod 8$: an odd squared is $1\mod 8$, so $y^2 +5 \equiv 6 \mod 8$, which is not a cube in $\ZZ/8$ since any cube is $0\mod 8$.

- $5$ can not divide $y$.
  If so, $5$ would divide the left-hand side and thus the right-hand side, which forces $5\divides x$ since $5$ is prime.
  Then $5^3 \divides x^3$, meaning $5^3 \divides y^2 + 5$.
  In this case, $5^2 \divides y^2 + 5$, and if $5\divides y$ then $5^2 \divides y^2$, so we'd need $5^2 \divides 5$.

These together imply that $\gcd(y^2 + 5, 25) = 1$.
This $N(P) \divides 1$, forcing $P = \gens{ 1 }$, a contradiction.

:::

Thus we can write
\[
\gens{ y + \sqrt{-5} }  &= I^3 \\
\gens{ y - \sqrt{-5} }  &= J^3
.\]

In the previous argument, we wrote out $(a + b \sqrt{-5} )^3$, expanded, and compared coefficients.
Here we have an equation in ideals, and we can't do something similar unless $I, J$ are principal.
This is in fact the case: we'll restrict our attention to the class group.
The left-hand side is the unit ideal, since it is principal.
So we can write $[I]^3 = [J]^3 = e$, but we also know $\Cl(\ZZ_K) \cong \GG_a(\ZZ/2\ZZ)$, so this can only happen if $[I] = [J] = e$ and $I, J$ must be principal.
So we can write \( I = \gens{ a + b \sqrt{-5}}  \) for some \( a, b \in \ZZ \).
Thus 
\[
\gens{ y + \sqrt{-5} } = \gens{ (a + b \sqrt{-5} )^2 } \implies y + \sqrt{-5} = \pm 1 \qty { a + b \sqrt{-5} }^3  
,\]
using the fact that they differ by a unit but the only units in $\ZZ[ \sqrt{-5} ]$ are $\pm 1$.
The original proof now goes through, comparing coefficients of \( \sqrt{-5} \).
This will force $b = \pm 1$, then plug things back in to find $a$, then $y$, then $x$.
The conclusion is that there are no solutions.
:::

:::{.remark}
The critical takeaway: unique factorization failed, but the structure of the class group saved us! 
We crucially used that it had no elements of order 3.
See the book for a general theorem about equations $y^2 + d = x^3$.
So ideal theory gives us a way to study Diophantine equations.
:::

## Ch. 10: The Class Group as a Measure of Non-unique Factorization


:::{.remark}
This statement shows up in talks: it's more of a vague sentiment than an actual theorem, but we'll discuss a way to make it precise.
:::



:::{.theorem title="?"}
Recall that the class number is defined as $h_K \da \# \Cl(\ZZ_K)$.
Then
\[
h_K = 1 \iff \ZZ_K \text{ is a UFD}
.\]

:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
$\implies$:
Every ideal is equivalent to the unit ideal, so every ideal is principal and PID implies UFD.

$\impliedby$:
Note that this is subtle: this is the claim that $\ZZ_K$ is a UFD $\implies \ZZ_K$ is a PID, which isn't true for general rings (e.g. $\ZZ[x]$).
Suppose $\ZZ_K$ is a UFD, then it's enough to show that every prime ideal is principal.
Let $P$ be prime, then $P$ lies above some ordinary prime $p$, so $P \divides \gens{ p }$.
We can factor \( \gens{ p }= \gens{ \prod_{i=1}^k \pi_i  } = \prod_{i=1}^k \gens{ \pi_i } \) for some $\pi_i$ irreducible.
A prime ideal dividing a product, by unique factorization, must divide a factor, so $P \divides \gens{ \pi_i }$ for some $i$. 
In a UFD, irreducibles are prime, so \( \gens{ \pi_i }  \) is a prime ideal, so we have a prime ideal dividing a prime ideal.
By unique factorization, this forces $P = \gens{ \pi_i }$, make $P$ principal.
:::


:::{.remark}
Can anything be said if $h_K = 2$, even though we know $\ZZ_K$ is not a UFD?
:::


:::{.theorem title="Carlitz"}
$h_K = 2 \iff$ in $\ZZ_K$, any 2 factorizations of nonzero nonunit $\alpha$ into irreducibles have the same number of terms.
:::


:::{.remark}
For example, in $\ZZ[ \sqrt{-5} ]$ we have $6 = (2)(3) = (1 + \sqrt{-5} )(1 - \sqrt{-5} )$, which have the same number of factors.
:::


:::{.proof title="$\implies$"}


:::{.lemma title="?"}
Suppose $h_K = 2$, and suppose \( \pi \in \ZZ_K \) is an irreducible that is not prime (which is possible in a non-UFD).
Then factoring \( \gens{ \pi } = P_1 P_2  \) involves exactly two prime ideals $P_1, P_2$ in $\ZZ_K$.
:::


:::{.proof title="of lemma"}
Write \( \gens{ \pi }= \prod_{i=1}^g P_i  \), we then want to show $g=2$.
We have $g\geq 2$, since otherwise this would be a prime ideal, which would make $\pi$ a prime element.
The claim is that none of the $P_i$ can be principal.
Suppose toward a contradiction $P_1 = \gens{ \rho }$. 
Note that multiplying ideals yields smaller sets, so the right-hand side is a subset of \( \gens{ \rho }  \), as is the left-hand side, and so \( \rho \divides \pi \).
Since the $P_i$ were principal prime ideals, $\rho$ is prime and thus irreducible (since prime $\implies$ irreducible for any domain), so $\rho = u \pi$ for some unit.
Thus they generate the same ideal, and \( P_1 = \gens{ \rho } = \gens{ \pi }   \).
But then $\pi$ generates a prime ideal, make $\pi$ prime, a contradiction.

So none of the $P_i$ are principal.
Look at this equation in the class group.
The left-hand side is the identity, and the right-hand side are all non-identity elements a group of order 2.
So $[P_1][P_2] = e$, making $P_1 P_2 = \gens{ \omega }$ principal.
Then \( \gens{ \pi }\subseteq \gens{ \omega }   \) and so \( \omega \divides \pi \).
Moreover, \( \omega \) is not a unit since the product of two prime ideals is not the unit ideal.
Since \( \pi \) is irreducible, this makes \( \omega= u \pi \) and thus \( \gens{ \omega } = \gens{ \pi }   \).
If this were the case, we could cancel in the original equation:
\[
\gens{ \pi } &= (P_1 P_2)P_3 \cdots P_g = \gens{ \pi } P_3 \cdots P_g   \\
\implies \gens{ 1 } = P_3 \cdots P_g 
,\]
but this is a product of prime ideals resulting in the unit ideal.
This can only happen if there are no terms in this product.

:::



:::








