# Thursday, January 14

See website for notes on books, intro to class.

> Site: ?

## Motivation

Solving Diophantine equations, i.e. polynomial equations over $\ZZ$.


:::{.example title="?"}
Consider $y^2 = x^3 + x$.


:::{.claim}
$(x, y) = (0, 0)$ is the only solution.
:::

To see this, write $y^2 = x(x^2+1)$, which are relatively prime, i.e. no $D\in \ZZ$ divides both of them.
Why?
If $d \divides x$ and $d \divides x+1$, then $d\divides (x^2+1) + (-x) = 1$.
It's also the case that both $x^2+1$ and $x^2$ are squares (up to a unit), so $x^2, x^2 + 1$ are consecutive squares in $\ZZ$.
But the gaps between squares are increasing: $1, 2, 4, 9, \cdots$.
The only possibilities would be $x=0, y=1$, but in this case you can conclude $y=0$. 

:::


:::{.example title="Fermat"}
Consider $y^2 = x^3-2$.


:::{.claim}
$(3, \pm 5)$ are the only solutions.
:::

Rewrite $x^3 = y^2+2 =(y+ \sqrt{-2})(y - \sqrt{-2})$, factored in $\ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \da \ts{a+b\srt{-2} \st a,b,\in \ZZ}$.
This is a subring of $\CC$, and thus at least an integral domain.
We want to try the same argument: showing the two factors are relatively prime.
A little theory will help here:

:::{.definition title="Norm Map"}
For \( \alpha\in \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \) define $N \alpha = \alpha\bar \alpha$.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let \( \alpha, \beta \in \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \).
Then 

1. \( N(\alpha \beta) = N(\alpha) N(\beta) \)
2. $N( \alpha) \in \ZZ_{\geq 0}$ and $N(\alpha) = 0$ if and only if \( \alpha= 0 \).

3. \( N(\alpha) = 1 \iff \alpha\in R\units \) 
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}

1. Missing, see video (10:13 AM).

2. \( N(\alpha) = a^2 + 2b^2 \geq 0 \), so this equals zero if and only if \( \alpha= \beta= 0 \)  

3. Write \( 1 = \alpha\bar \alpha \) if \( N(\alpha) = 1 \in R|units\).
Conversely if \( \alpha\in R\units \) write \( \alpha \beta = 1 \), then \( 1 = N(1) = N(\alpha \beta) = N(\alpha ) N(\beta ) \in \ZZ_{\geq 0} \), which forces both to be 1.


:::


:::{.claim}
The two factors \( y \pm \sqrt 2 \) are *coprime* in \( \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \), i.e. every common divisor is a unit.
:::

Suppose \( \delta\divides y\pm \sqrt{-2} \), then \( y + \sqrt{-2} = \delta \beta \) for some \( \beta\in \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \).
Take norms to obtain 
\( y^2 + 2 = N \delta N \beta \), and in particular 

- \( N \delta y^2 +2 \) 
- \( \delta \divides (y+ \sqrt{-2} ) - (y - \sqrt{-2} ) = 2 \sqrt{-2} \) and thus \( N \delta \divides N(2 \sqrt{-2} ) = 8 \).

In the original equation \( y^2 = x^3-2 \), if $y$ is even then $x$ is even, and $x^3 - 2 \equiv 0-2 \mod 4 \equiv 2$, and so $y^2 \equiv 2 \mod 4$.
But this can't happen, so $y$ is odd, and we're done: we have \( N \delta\divides 8 \) which is even or 1, but \( N \delta\divides y^2 +2 \) which is odd, so \( N \delta = 1 \).

:::

We can identify the units in this ring:
\[
U(\ZZ[\sqrt{-2} ] \ts{ a + b \sqrt{-2} \st a^2 + 2b^2 = 1}
\]
which forces $a^2 \leq 1, b^2 \leq 1$ and thus this set is $\ts{\pm 1}$.

So we have \( x^3 = ab \) which are relatively primes, so $a,b$ should also be cubes.
