# Thursday, January 28

Today: Chapter 5, Euclidean quadratics fields.
In a first algebra course, one proces that if $R$ is a Euclidean domain, then the arithmetic of $R$ is very intersting:

- $R$ is a PID, and as a consequence
- $R$ is a UFD



:::{.definition title="Euclidean Domain"}
A domain $R$ is **Euclidean** if and only if there is a function $\varphi R\smz \to \ZZ^{\geq 0}$ such that for all $a,b\in R$ with $b\neq 0$ there are $q, r\in R$ with $a = bq + r$ with $r=0$ or \( \varphi(r) < \varphi(b) \).
\( \varphi \) is referred to as a **Euclidean function**.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}

- For $R=\ZZ$, one can take \( \varphi(\wait) \da \abs{\wait} \).
- $R = F[t]$ for $F$ a field with \( \varphi(\wait) = \deg(\wait) \).
:::


:::{.remark}
Given a number field $K$, does $Z_K$ have nice factorization, i.e. is it a UFD?
Not always, as we saw last time.
If it were Euclidean, then yes!

:::


:::{.question}
Which quadratic fields $K$ have $Z_K$ Euclidean?
:::


:::{.definition title="Euclidean and Norm-Euclidean Number Fields"}
If $K$ is a quadratic field, then 

- $K$ is **Euclidean** if and only if $\ZZ_K$ is a Euclidean domain,

- $K$ is **norm-Euclidean** if and only if $\ZZ_K$ is Euclidean with respect to \( \varphi(\wait) \da \abs{N(\wait)} \).

:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $K$ be a quadratic field.
Then $K$ is norm-Euclidean if and only if for all \( \beta\in K \) there is a \( \gamma\in \ZZ_K \) such that \( \abs{ N(\beta- \gamma) } < 1 \).
In other words, $K$ is norm Euclidean if and only if  every element can be approximated by an element in $\ZZ_K$.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
$\impliedby$:
Let \( a,b \in \ZZ_k \) with \( b\neq 0 \).
Define \( \beta\da a/b \in K \), then by assumption choose \( \gamma \) such that \( \abs{N({a\over b} - \gamma}< 1  \).
Multiplying both sides by \( N(b) \) and using the fact that $N(\wait), \abs{\wait}$ are multiplicative, we have 
\[
\abs{N(a - b \gamma)} < \abs{N(b)} 
.\]
Then $a = bq + r \da b \gamma + (a - b \gamma)$.
:::

## Norm-Euclidean Imaginary Quadratic Fields

Suppose $K = \QQ( \sqrt{d} )$ with $d<0$ squarefree, so we can write
\[
K = \ts{ a + b \sqrt{d} \st a,b, \in \QQ }
K = \ts{ a + b i\sqrt{\abs{d}} \st a,b, \in \QQ } \subseteq \CC
.\]
Geometrically, this is a dense subset of $\CC$, so it's not easy to draw.
But we can draw $\ZZ_K$ -- what does it look like?
We know that $d=2,3 \mod 4$ then $\ZZ_K = \ts{a + b \sqrt{d} \st a,b,\in \ZZ}$:

\begin{tikzpicture}
    \draw [thick, gray,-latex] (-5, 0) -- (7, 0);% Draw x axis
    \draw [thick, gray,-latex] (0, -5) -- (0, 5);% Draw y axis

    \clip (-5,-5) rectangle (10cm,10cm); % Clips the picture...
    %\pgftransformcm{1}{0.6}{0.7}{1}{\pgfpoint{0cm}{0cm}}
          % This is actually the transformation matrix entries that
          % gives the slanted unit vectors. 
    \draw[style=help lines,dashed] (-14,-14) grid[step=2cm] (6,5);
          % Draws a grid in the new coordinates.
          %\filldraw[fill=gray, fill opacity=0.3, draw=black] (0,0) rectangle (2,2);
              % Puts the shaded rectangle
    \foreach \x in {--3,-2,-1,0,1,2}{% Two indices running over each
      \foreach \y in {-2,-1, ..., 2}{% node on the grid we have drawn 
        \node[draw,circle,inner sep=2pt,fill] at (2*\x,2*\y) {};
            % Places a dot at those points
      }
    }
        \node[draw,red, circle,inner sep=2pt,fill] at (0, 0) {};

	\draw [decorate,decoration={brace,amplitude=10pt},xshift=-4pt,yshift=0pt] (6.5,2.0) -- (6.5,0.1) node [black,midway,xshift=25pt] {\footnotesize $\sqrt{\abs{d}}$};
	\draw [decorate,decoration={brace,amplitude=10pt},xshift=-4pt,yshift=0pt] (6.5,-0.1) -- (6.5,-2) node [black,midway,xshift=25pt] {\footnotesize $\sqrt{\abs{d}}$};

\end{tikzpicture}

When $d \equiv 1 \mod 4$, we have $\ZZ_k = \ts{ {1\over 2}(a + b \sqrt{d} ) \st a,b,\in \ZZ,\, a\equiv b \mod 2}$.
On the real axis, if $b=0$ then $a$ is an even integer and $\ts{(1/2)a}$ is all integers.
To get the remaining elements, we don't just shift up and down: setting $b=1$ yields elements that look like $(1/2)a + \sqrt{d}$ where $a$ is odd, so we get the following:






