# Thursday January 23rd

Let $\mch$ a family of non-negative function.
Then $\mch$ is a $\labda\dash$system iff

1. $1 \in \mch$
2. $X_1, X_2 \in \mch$ with $c_1 X_1 + c_2 X_2 \geq 0 \implies c_1 X_1 + c_2 X_2 \in \mch$.
3. If $x_n \in \mch$ and $x_n \nearrow x$ then $x \in \mch$

If $\mch \supset$ all indicator functions of sets in $\mcd$, $\mcd$ is a $\pi\dash$class, and $\mch$ is a $\lambda\dash$system, then $\mch$ contains all non-negative $\sigma(\mcd)$ measurable functions.

Note that if $\mcg$ be a class, $\sigma(\mcg)$ is the sigma-algebra generated by that class.

Definition:
Let $X$ be a real measurable function on $(\Omega, \mca)$ and $\mcb$ be the Borel sets.

Then
\begin{align*}
\sigma(X) 
&= \sigma(\theset{X\in B \suchthat B \in \mcb})  \\
&= \sigma(\theset{X \leq x \suchthat \forall x})
\end{align*}

is the sigma-algebra generated by the random variable $X$.

> Moral: if you know all of the outcomes of $X$, you know the sigma-algebra it generates.

We can then extend this to define $\sigma(X_1, X_2, \cdots)$

Theorem:

1. Given measurable function $X_i$ and a Borel measurable function $f(X_1, \cdots,)$ on $\RR^n$ then $f(X_1, \cdots)$ is $\sigma(X_1, \cdots)\dash$measurable.
2. If $X$ is $\sigma(X_1, \cdots)\dash$measurable, then there exists a Borel $f(X_1, \cdots)$ on $\RR^n$ such that $X = f(X_1, \cdots)$.

Proof:
Let 

- $\mcg$ be the set of Borel functions on $\RR^n$, 
- $\mch = \theset{f(X_1, \cdots) \geq 0 \suchthat f\in\mcg}$,
- $\mcd = \theset{ X_i \leq x_i \suchthat i = 1, \ldots, n}$.

Note that $\mcd$ is a $\pi\dash$class.

For all $D\in \mcd$, we have $\indic{D} \in \mch$, and therefore

\begin{align*}
f(X_1, \cdots) = \indic{\theset{X_1 \leq x_1, X_2 \leq x_2, \cdots}} = \indic{\theset{[-\infty, x_1) \cross [-\infty, x_2) \cross \cdots   }}(X_1, \cdots)
.\end{align*}

where we note that $f(x) = \indic{[-\infty, a)}(x)$ and similarly $\indic{z\leq a} = f(z)$.
Since we can write any $X$ as $X^+ - X^-$, which are both non-negative, it suffices to show this for non-negative functions.
