# Thursday January 16th

Recall some definitions:

- $\pi\dash$class: $A, B \in \mathcal A \implies AB \in \mathcal A$

- $\lambda\dash$class:
  1. $\Omega \in \mathcal A$
  2. $A \supset B \implies A\setminus B \in \mathcal A$
  3. $A_n \nearrow A \implies A \in\mathcal A$.

We can define minimal such classes containing any nonempty class $\mathcal E$.

**Claim:**
A $\lambda\pi\dash$class is a $\sigma\dash$algebra.

> Note: this just means that it is both a $\sigma$ and a $\pi$ class. 

*Proof:*

- If $A\in \mathcal A$, then $A^c = \Omega - A \in \mathcal AA$ since $\Omega, A \in \mathcal A$ and $A \subset \Omega$ (uses $\lambda\dash$class properties).

- Then $(A \union B)^c = A^c B^c \in \mathcal A$ (using $\pi\dash$class properties).

- If $A_n \in \mathcal A$ and $A_n$ are increasing, then $A_n \nearrow A \definedas \union A_n$, which is in $\mathcal A$.

Remark:
Any $\sigma\dash$algebra is a $\lambda\pi\dash$class.

Theorem:
If $\mathcal D$ is a $\pi\dash$class, then $\sigma(\mathcal C) = \lambda(\mathcal D)$.

> Here we are taking the algebras generated by each, and $\sigma(\mathcal D)$ is the Borel $\sigma\dash$algebra.

Since $\lambda(\mathcal D)$ is minimal, $\lambda(\mathcal D) \subset \sigma(\mathcal D)$.
Thus it suffices to show $\lambda(\mathcal D)$ is a $\pi\dash$class.

> Similar to proof that $\sigma(A) = m(A)$ the monotone algebra.

Let $\mathcal G_1 = \theset{ A\suchthat AB \in \lambda(\mathcal D) ~\forall B \in \mathcal{D} }$.
Want to show that $AB \in \lambda(\mathcal{D}) \implies AB \in \lambda{\mathcal{D}}$.
We can observe that $\mcg_1 \supset \mcd$ since $\mcd$ is a $\pi\dash$class and $\lambda(\mcd) \supset \mcd$, so $\Omega \in \mcg_1$.
So choose $A,D \in \mcg_1$ with $A\supset D$.
Then $AB, AD \in \lambda(\mcd)$, so $(AB - AD) = A(B-D)$ is in $\lambda(\mcd)$.

If $A_n \in \mcd$ with $A_n \nearrow \lim A_n$, then $A_n B \in \lambda(\mcd)$ for all $B \in \mcd$.
Then $(\lim A_n)B = \lim (A_n B)$, since both are in $\lambda$.
Thus $\mcg_1 \supset \lambda(\mcd)$, and for any $A \in \lambda(\mcd)$, $B\in \mcd$, we have $AB\in \lambda(\mcd)$.

Now let $\mcg_2 = \theset{B \suchthat AB \in \lambda(\mcd) ~\forall A \in \lambda(\mcd)}$.
By the above result, $\mcg_2 \supset \mcd$.
Moreover, $\mcg_2$ is a $\lambda\dash$class, which we need to verify.
But then $\mcg_2 \supset \lambda(\mcd)$, then we're done since $B\in\lambda(\mcd) \intersect \mcg_2$ implies that for all $A \in \lambda(\mcd)$, $AB \in \lambda(\mcd)$, which is what we wanted to show.

$\qed$

