# 2021-06-06

## 12:12

- Context: the infinity category of spaces, i.e. homotopy types
- Take smooth manifolds, take the Yoneda embedding to $\Psh(\sm\Mfd)$: these satisfy a Mayer-Vietoris gluing property, and homotopy invariance in the sense that $\Hom(\wait, X) \cong \Hom(\wait \cross I, X)$
  - Why the first argument: homotopy invariance *as a presheaf*

- AG setting: $\Psh(\sm\Sch_{/k})$, send to presheaves to define **motivic spaces**.
  - Satisfies a Nisnevich gluing condition and $\AA^1$ invariance
  Similar homotopy invariance: $F(\AA^1 \cross X)\cong F(X)$.

- See Betti realization for $k=\CC$: $\sm\Sch_{/\CC}\to \Spaces$ where $X\mapsto X(\CC)$.

- From topology: identify $\B \U_n(\CC) = \Gr_n(\CC)$ to get rank $\Vect_{/\CC}^{n}(U) \cong \pi_0 \Maps(U, \B \U_n(\CC))$.


- Problem in AG: there are two rank 2 vector bundles on $\PP^1 \cross \AA^1$ whose fibers over 0 and 1 are $\OO^2$ and $\OO(1) \oplus \OO(-1)$.

- Theorem: for $U$ smooth affine $\kSch$, there is an equivalence of rank $n$ vector bundles on $U$ mod equivalence to $\pi_0 \Maps_{\Spc(k)}(U, \B \GL_n)$ where again $\B\GL_n \cong \Gr_n$.
  - Would like this for non-smooth non-affine schemes?

- Algebraic K theory: finitely generated projective \(R\dash\)modules mod equivalence with $\oplus$, then take group completion to get $K_0(R)$.
  - $K_0(k) \cong \NN^\gp \cong \ZZ$.
- To get a space: take $K(R) \da \Proj(\rmod)^\gp$ to get a space, set $K_i R \da \pi_i K(R)$

- Prop: the $K$ theory space here is a motivic space, $K: \sm\Sch_{/k}\op \to \Spaces$.

- Interesting fact: $\Loop^\infty \SS \cong (\Finset, \disjoint)^\gp$.


- Note from Yuri Sulyma:
"B is [widespread but] really bad notation for geometric realization. You should think of B as part of an equivalence B: {monoidal categories} -> {pointed connected (2-)categories}. Up to the Quillen equivalence {Kan complexes} ~= {spaces}, geometric realization takes a (quasi-)category (or simplicial set) and inverts all the morphisms.

So $M^\gp = \Omega\realize{\B M}$: you take $M$, deloop to turn the objects into morphisms, invert all the morphisms, then take loops to get your objects back."


- Theorem (Morel-Voevodsky): $X\in \sm\kSch$
\[
K(X) \cong \Maps_{\Spaces(k)}(X, \ZZ \cross \Gr_\infty)
.\]

- Uses stratification of $\Gr$ by affines, thanks Schubert calculus!

- There is an $\AA^1$ homotopy equivalence on affines: $K \homotopic \ZZ \cross \Gr_\infty$.
  - Also $\Betti(k) \homotopic \ZZ \cross \BU = \Loopinf \KU$.

- Theorem: Can replace $\Gr$ with $\Hilb_\infty(\AA^\infty)$.
Very singular!

- Definition: $\Hilb_d(\AA^n)(T)$ are maps $Z\injects \AA^n\cross T$ over $T$ which are finite flat of degree $d$ over $T$.
  Morally: $d\dash$tuples of points in $\AA^n$.
  - Representable! But $\Hilb_\infty$ is a colimit, thus an Ind scheme.
  - This says either the Hilbert scheme or K theory is hard.

  - In fact the theorem defines a map $\Gr_{d-1} \to \Hilb_d(\AAA^\infty)$ sending a vector space to the tangent space at 0, and proves this is an $\AA^1\dash$homotopy equivalence on affines.
  - Sends subspace to thick point at zero.
    - Thick point: point with a tangent direction.

- Burt's proof worked!

- Grassmannian: parameterizes vector bundles with an embedding into $\infty$?
  - Cool fact for manifolds: $\Emb(M, \RR^\infty)$ is contractible!
  - Stacks: presheaves of groupoids?


:::{.proof title="?"}
First step in proof: forget embedding into $\AA^\infty$, send $\Vect_{d-1}$ to finite flat schemes of degree $d$ $\FFlat_d(R)$ over $\spec R$, which are stacks.
  - Send $V\to R \oplus V$, a square zero extension, add trivial multiplication.
  - Inverse: take an algebra $A\to A/R$ by killing the unit.
- Not an equivalence of stacks! Since $A\not\cong A/R \oplus R$, but the surprising fact is $A\to A/R \oplus R$ is $\AA^1$ homotopic to the identity on $\FFlat(R)$.
- Cook up an explicit homotopy: take the Rees algebra $\Rees(A) \da \ts{ a_0 + a_1 t + \cdots \st a_0\in R } \subseteq A[t]$.
  - $\Rees(A) / \gens{ t-1 }\homotopic A$
  - $\Rees(A) / \gens{ t }\homotopic R \oplus A/R$. 

:::

- Some analogs of these theorems for:
  - Hermitian K theory: 
    - Use orthogonal Grassmannian, take vector bundles with extra data of nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form.
    Need $\char k \neq 2$.
    Take Gorenstein closed subschemes, which is extra data of orientation.
- Twisted algebraic K theory (WIP)
  - Twisted with respect to an Azumaya algebra or Brauer class.


## 15:09

- Mike was thinking about computing $\tmf$ at the prime $p=3$, since for $p>3$ it breaks up as a wedge of copies $\BP \gens{ 2 }$. 
  Roughly twice as hard as computing K theory with $\ku$! (Wilson, Adams, Margalis)
- For $p=2$: an Adams spectral sequence (Mahowald, Davis-Mahowald) built out of $H^*(\tmf, \FF_2) A \tensor_{A(2) } \FF_2$ where $A(2) = \gens{ \Sq^1, \Sq^2, \Sq^4 }$. 
  - Cohomology of $H\FF_2$ is the Steenrod algebra?
  - Can compute $\Ext$, Brunner did this on a computer
- For $p=3$, heuristic: should be like $\ko$ at $p=2$ in terms of complexity.
- Also thinking about Hopkins-Miller higher real K theories.
- First Talbot: huge efforts by Norrah!!!
  - Important for Talbot to be a safe space to *not* necessarily be an expert

- Formal group laws over $R$: a power series $x +_F y \da F(x, y) \in R\powerseries{x, y}$ such that
  - $x +_F 0 = x$
  - $x_F y = y +_F x$
  - $x+F (y +_F z) = (x +_F y) +_F z$.

- A morphism of fgls: $f\in R\powerseries{x}$ with $f(x+_F y)= f(x) +_G f(y)$.

- The functor $R\to \fgl_{/R}$ is representable, as is the functor sending $R$ to formal group laws over $R$ along with an isomorphism $f$ such that $f'(0) = 1$.

- Theorem (Quillen): $\MU_*$ is the ring representing the first functor.
  - Milnor showed $\MU_* = \ZZ[x_1, \cdots]$.
  - How to prove representability: take representing object for power series, check what the conditions translate to.
  - $\MU_* \MU$ represents the second factor (i.e. the $\MU_*$ homology of $\MU$, given by $\pi_*(\MU \smash \MU))$.

- Example: if $n\in \NN$, then $[n]_F (x) = \overset{F}{\sum_{k\leq n}} x = nx + \cdots$ is an endomorphism of $F$.
