# 2021-04-21

## 15:05

Bhargav Bhatt (Harvard NT Seminar)

- One can take etale cohomology of varieties, and later refine to schemes, and thus take it for the base field even when it's not algebraically closed and extract arithmetically interesting information.

- Prismatic cohomology: meant to relate a number of other cohomology theories

- Prism: a pair $(A, I)$ where $A$ is a commutative ring with a derived Frobenius lift $\phi:A\to A$, i.e. a $\delta\dash$structure.
  - $I \normal A$ is an ideal defining a Cartier divisor.
  - $A$ is $(P, I)\dash$complete.
  - Any ideal generator $d\in I$ satisfies $\phi(d) = d^p + p\cdot u, u\in A\units$.

- Fix a scheme and study prisms over it.
  Need these definitions to have stability under base-change.

- Examples:
  - $A \da \ZZ_p$ and $\phi = \id$ with $I = \gens{ p }$ yields crystalline cohomology. 
  - $A \da \ZZ_p[[u]], \phi(u) = u^p$.
  Then $I = \gens{ E(u) }$ is generated by an Eisenstein polynomial. 
  Here $A/I = \OO_K$

- Prismatic site: fix a base prism $(A, I)$ for $X$ a \(p\dash \)adic formal scheme over $A/I$.
  Define
  \[
  (X/A)_\prism = \ts{ (A, I) \to (B, J) \in \Mor(\Prism), \Spf(B/J) \to X \text{ over } A/I } 
  ,\]
  topologized via the flat topology on $B/J$.

- There is a structure sheaf $\OO_\prism$ where $(B, J) \to B$.
  Take $R \Gamma$, which receives a Frobenius action, to define a cohomology theory.
  Why is this a good idea?

- Absolute prismatic sites: for $X\in \Sch(\padic)$, define
\[
X_\prism \da \ts{ (B, J) \in \Prism,\, \Spf(B/J) \to X } 
.\]
  Take sheaf cohomology to obtain $R\Gamma_\prism(X) \da R \Gamma(X_\prism, \OO_\prism) \selfmap_\phi$.

- The category $\Prism$ doesn't have a final object, so has interesting cohomology.
Relates to algebraic $K\dash$theory of $\ZZ_p$?

- Questions: let $X_{/\ZZ_p}$ be a smooth formal scheme.
  -  What is the cohomological dimension of $R \Gamma_\prism(X)$?
  - What are the $F\dash$crystals on $X_\prism$?
    - Produce finite flat $B\dash$modules?

- Bhatt and Lurie: found a stacky way to understand the absolute prismatic site of $\ZZ_p$.
  Drinfeld found independently.

- Construction due to Simpson: take $X\in \Var(\Alg)$, define a de Rham presheaf
\[
X_{\dR}: \calg^{\fp} &\to \Set \\
R &\mapsto X(R_\red)
.\]

  - Translates other cohomology theories into something about coherent sheaves..?
  - Can reduce to studying e.g. a vector bundle on a more complicated object.

- Def: Cartier-Witt stack, a.k.a. the prismatization of $\ZZ_p$
   - Define $\WCart$ to be the formal stack on $p\dash$complete rings.
- Plug in a $p\dash$nilpotent ring $R$ to extract all (derived) prism structure on $W(R)$.
- Prisms aren't base-change compatible without the derived part.
- This is a groupoid.

- An explicit presentation: $\WCart_0(R)$ are distinguished Witt vectors in $W(R)$.
  Given by \( [a_0, a_1, \cdots ] \) where $a_0$ is nilpotent and $a_1$ is a unit.
  This is a formal affine scheme.
  $\WCart = \WCart_0 / W^*$ is a presentation as a stack quotient.

  - Receives a natural Frobenius action, which is a derived Frobenius lift.

- Start by understanding its points, suffices to evaluate on fields of characteristic $p$.

- If $k\in \Field(\Perf)_{\chp}$, $\WCart(k) = \ts{ \pt }$, with the point represented by $(W(k), ?)$.

  - Yields a (geometric?) point $x_{\FFp}: \spec(\FFp) \to \WCart$.

- Analogy to understanding Hodge-Tate cohomology.
  Similar easy locus in this stack.

- Take 0th component of distinguished Witt vectors to get a diagram

<!--\begin{tikzcd}-->
	<!--\WCart &&& {\hat{\AA^1}/\GG_m} \\-->
	<!--\\-->
	<!--\\-->
	<!--{\WCart^{\mathrm{HT}}} &&& {B\GG_m}-->
	<!--\arrow[dashed, from=4-1, to=4-4]-->
	<!--\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-4]-->
	<!--\arrow[hook, from=4-4, to=1-4]-->
	<!--\arrow[hook, from=4-1, to=1-1]-->
<!--\end{tikzcd}-->

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXFdDYXJ0Il0sWzMsMCwiXFxoYXR7XFxBQV4xfS9cXEdHX20iXSxbMywzLCJCXFxHR19tIl0sWzAsMywiXFxXQ2FydF57XFxtYXRocm17SFR9fSJdLFszLDIsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dLFswLDFdLFsyLDEsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV0sWzMsMCwiIiwxLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifX19XV0=)


- The bottom-left is this *Hodge-Tate stack*.

- Now has a better chance of being an algebraic stack instead of a formal stack.
  Bottom arrow kills the formal direction.

- Will be classifying stack of a group scheme: need to produce a point and take automorphisms.

- Take the distinguished element $V(?) \in W(\ZZ_p)$.
Produces a map
\[
\Spf(\ZZ_p) \mapsvia{\pi_\HT} \WCart^\HT
.\]

  - Fact: $\pi_\HT$ is a flat cover and $\Aut(\pi_\HT) = W^*[ F]$.

- **Upshot**: $\WCart^\HT = B W^* [F]$ is a classifying stack.
  Quasicoherent sheaves on the left and representations of the (classifying stack of the) group scheme on the right. I.e. $D_\qc(\WCart^\HT) = \Rep(W^*[F])$.
  - Teichmüller lift yields a $\ZZ/p$ grading on the LHS.

  - Something about Deligne-Illusie?
  Hodge-to-deRham degeneration?
  - Upshot: a divisor inside is easy to understand.

- Fact: $D_\qc(\WCart)$ are equivalent to $\inverselim_{(A, I)\in \Prism} D_{(P, I)-?}(A)$.

- Diffracted Hodge cohomology: let $X\in \Schf_{\ZZ_p}$.
  Get a prismatic structure sheaf using the assignment $(A, I) \to R \Gamma_\prism \qty{ (X\tensor A/I) / A}$.

- Heuristic: $\spec \ZZ_p$ should be 1-dimensional over something.

- Get an absolute comparison: $\cohdim R \Gamma_\prism (X) \leq d+1$ where $d = \reldim X_{/\ZZ_p}$.

- There is a deRham comparison: 
\[
X_{\FFp}^* H_\prism(X) \cong R \Gamma_\dR (X_{\FFp})
.\]

- There is a Hodge-Tate comparison: the object $H_\prism(X)$ restricted to $\WCart^\HT$ has an increasing filtration with $\gr_i = R \Gamma(X, \Omega^i_X)[-i]$.

  - Use representation interpretation, then $\mu_p \actson \gr_i$ by weight $-i$.

- Combine these comparisons to get Deligne-Illusie: if $\reldim X < p$, then 
\[
R \Gamma_\dR(X_{\FFp}) \cong \bigoplus_{i} R \Gamma(X_{\FFp}, \Omega^i[-i])
.\]
Get a lift to characteristic zero, yields Hodge-to-deRham degeneration there.

- An $F\dash$crystal on $X_\prism$ is a vector bundle $\bundle{E} \in \Vect(X_\prism, \OO_\prism)$? 
  Plus some extra data.

- Infinite tensor product:
\[
I_\prism \tensor F^* I_\prism \tensor (F^2)^* I_\prism \tensor \cdots 
.\]
  Converges to some object \( \OO_\prism \ts{ 1 } \in \Pic(X_\prism, \OO_\prism ) \), twisted?
  Yields isomorphism of sheaves after inverting $I_\prism$,
   \[
   F^* \OO_\prism \ts{ 1 } \cong I_\prism\inv \tensor \OO_\prism \ts{ 1 } 
   .\]

   - Convergence: this is a formal stack, any thickenings are identified with something...

- Some analog of Artin-Schreir here, taking fixed points?

- There is a natural functor from $F\dash$crystals on $X$ to local $\ZZ_p$ systems on a geometric fiber $X_?$?

- Main theorem: produces descent data, uses work on Beilinson fiber sequence (Antieu, Morrow, others?)

- Can say
\[
H^i(\Delta_{\ZZ_p}) =
\begin{cases}
\ZZ_p & i=0 
\\
\prod_{\NN} \ZZ_p & i=1.
\end{cases}
\]
  Can compute using THH?
  $\pi_{-1}( \TP(\ZZ_p) )$ is where the $i=1$ part comes from.

  - TP corresponds to prismatic cohomology, THH corresponds to Hodge-Tate cohomology.

- Prismatic is filtered by things that look like Hodge-Tate


