# 2021-05-24

## 12:07

Reference: GROOT

- Big idea: free implies flat for algebras, is this true in the equivariant settings?
Abelian groups $\approx$ Mackey functors.
- $\ZZ \approx$ Burnside Mackey functors
- Commutative rings $\approx$ Green functors $(E_\infty$ algebras), Incomplete functors, Tambara functors
- Free algebra $\ZZ[G]$ comparable to free incomplete Tambara functor
- Similarities come from being algebras over operads.
- HHR involves spectral sequences of Mackey functors
- All rational Mackey functors are free
- $A^\OO [x_{G/H}]$ is almost never flat.
- A Mackey functor is an additive functor $M: A^g\to \Ab$, where $A^G$ is the Burnside category: finite $G\dash$sets, where morphisms $A^G(X, Y)$ is the group compution wrt $\coprod$ of finite $G\dash$sets, so spans.
  - Composition of spans is pullback.
  - Sends disjoint unions \to direct sums
  - Every object is the disjoint union of orbits $G/H$
- To define a Mackey functor $F$, it suffices to give abelian groups $F(G/H)$ for $H\leq G$, restrictions $\res^H_K$, and transfers $\tr_K^H$ in the target.
- Are transfers like inflation?
- Burnside Mackey functor: $\ul A$. Objects are $K_0$ of finite groups under $\coprod$, $\res$ is the forgetful functor, $\tr_K^H([x]) = [H \fiberprod{K} X]$
- Theorem (Lewis): the category of Mackey functors is abelian, and has a symmetric monoidal product $\boxtimes$ with unit $\ul A$.
- A Green functor is a monoid for $\boxtimes$, which is an $E_\infty$ algebra in Mackey functors.
	- A Mackey functor $R$ where $R(G/H)$ is a unital commutative ring and $\res^H_K$ is a ring morphism.
- An incomplete Tambara functor is an $N_\infty$ algebra in Mackey functors
- A Tambara functor is a Green functor with that data of a norm map $\nm_K^H$ a multiplicative morphism.
	- $\ul A$ has norms given by $\Set^K(A, B)$, $K\dash$equivariant set functions.