# Friday, October 02

Recall that *good filtration* is a chain $\ts{0} \subseteq V_1 \subseteq \cdots \subseteq V$ satisfying $V = \union V_i$ and $V_i/V_{i-1} \cong H^0(\lambda_i)$ for $\lambda_i$ some weight of $V$.

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let $V$ be a $G\dash$module and $\lambda \in X(T)_+$ with $\hom_G(L(\lambda), V)$.
If $\hom_G(L(\mu), V) = 0$ for any $\mu < \lambda$ and $\Ext_G^1(V(\mu), V) = 0$ for *all* $\mu \in X(T)_+$,
then $V$ contains a submodule isomorphic to $H^0(\lambda)$.
:::

That is, we have a lift of the following form:
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
L(\lambda) \ar[d, hook] \ar[r, hook] & V \\
H^0(\lambda) \ar[ru, hook, dotted, "\exists"]
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

:::{.theorem title="Well-definedness of the composition series (Jordan-Holder)"}
Let $V$ be a $G\dash$module.

1. If $V$ admits a good filtration, then the number of factors isomorphic to $H^0(\lambda)$, denoted $[V: H^0(\lambda)]$, is equal to $\dim \hom_G(V(\lambda), V)$.

> Note that $H^0(\lambda)$ may not by irreducible, but changing the filtration can not change the number of composition factors.

2. Suppose $\hom_G(V(\lambda), V)<\infty$, then TFAE:

  - $V$ admits a good filtration.
  - $\Ext^i_G(V(\lambda), V) = 0$ for all $\lambda \in X(T)_+$ and all $i>0$.
  - $\Ext^1_G(V(\lambda), V) = 0$ for all $\lambda \in X(T)_+$.

> Much like measuring projectivity: can check all exts, or just the first.

:::

:::{.proof title="Part a"}
Suppose $V$ has a good filtration.
Idea: induct on the filtration.

Suppose $V = H^0(\lambda_1)$, then
\[  
[V: H^0(\mu) ] = 
\begin{cases}
0 & \mu \neq \lambda_1 \\
1 & \mu = \lambda_1
\end{cases}
= \dim \hom_G(V(\lambda_1), V)
,\]
since we know the dimensions of these hom spaces from a previous result.

Suppose now that we have
\[  
0 \to H^0(\mu_1) \to V H^0(\mu_2) \to 0
.\]
Applying $F \da \hom_G(V(\lambda), \wait)$, we find that $\ext^1_G$ vanishes.
So this leads a SES, and the dimensions are thus additive.
The result follows since $F$ is additive.
:::

:::{.proof title="Part b"}

:::
