# Monday, September 21

Let $G$ be a reductive algebraic group scheme, $k=\bar \FF_p$ with $p>0$, equipped with the Frobenius map  $F:G\to G$ with $F^r$ its $r\dash$fold composition.
We defined *Frobenius kernels* $G_r \da \ker F^r$, which are in correspondence with the cocommutative Hopf algebras $\Dist(G_r)$.

Goal:
We want to classify simple $G_r\dash$modules, and to do this we'll use socles.

We have a maximal torus $T\subseteq G$ and thus $T_r \subseteq G_r$ after acting by Frobenius.
This yields a SES
\[  
0 \to p_r X(T) \to X(T) \to X(T)/p^r X(T) = X(T_r) \to 0
.\]

How to think about this: take $\lambda \in X(T_r)$, then we can write $\lambda = \lambda + p^r \sigma$ in $X(T_r)$ for some other weight $\sigma \in X(T)$.
We'll define the "baby Verma modules"
\[  
Z_r(\lambda) &\da \coind_{B_r^+}^{G_r} \lambda \\
Z_r'(\lambda) &\da \ind_{B_r^}^{G_r} \lambda
,\]

and we have $\dim Z_r(\lambda) = \dim Z_r'(\lambda) = p^{r \abs{\Phi^+}}$.

:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $\lambda\in X(T)$ be a weight.

1. $Z_r(\lambda)\downarrow_{B_r}$ is the *projective cover* of $\lambda$ and the *injective hull* of $\lambda - 2 (p^r-1) \rho$.

2. $Z_r'(\lambda)\downarrow_{B_r^+}$ is the *injective hull* of $\lambda$ and the *projective cover* of $\lambda - 2 (p^r-1) \rho$.
:::

> Note the latter are $T_r\dash$modules, so we let $U^+$ act trivially.


:::{.proof title="of 1"}
What we need to do:

1. Show $Z_r(\lambda)\downarrow_{B_r}$ is projective.
2. Show $Z_r(\lambda)$ is the smallest projective module such that $Z_r(\lambda) \surjects \lambda$.

For (1), we can write 
\[
\Dist(G_r) = \Dist(U_r^+) \Dist(B_r) = \Dist(B_r^+) \Dist(U_r),
,\]
and so
\[  
Z_r(\lambda) 
&= \coind_{B_r^+}^{G_r} \lambda \\
&= \qty{\dist(G_r) \tensor_{\Dist(B_r)} \lambda} \downarrow_{B_r^+} \\
&= \Dist(U_r^+)\tensor \lambda \\
&= \Dist(B_r^+) \tensor_{\Dist(T_r)} \lambda \\
&= \coind_{T_r}^{B_r^+} \lambda
.\]

Why is this projective? 
Look at cohomology, suffices to show that higher Exts vanish.
So consider
\[  
\Ext_{B_r^+}^n(\coind_{T_r}^{B_r^+}, M)
=
\Ext_{T_r}^n (\lambda, M) \qquad\text{by Frobenius reciprocity}
= 0 \qquad \text{for } n \geq 0
.\]
:::

