# Wednesday, November 04

Today: $G_r\dash T$ modules.

Note that $G_r\normal G_r T$, with $G_r T/G_r \cong T^{(r)}$.
We consider $G_r T\dash$modules, which are $G_r\dash$modules with a $T$ action given by
\[  
G_r \cross M &\to M \\
(g, m) &\mapsto g\cdot m
\]
which are $T\dash$equivariant, i.e. $t(g\cdot m) = (t\cdot g)(t\cdot m)$ for $t\in T, g\in G_r$, and $m\in M$ is a $G_r T\dash$module.
This essentially induces a grading on $G_r$.

## Representations for $G_r T$ and $G_r B$

Recall that we have a Frobenius map, for which we take the scheme-theoretic kernel:
\[  
F&: G \to G \\ 
F^r &\da F\circ F \circ \cdots \circ F \\
G_r &\da \ker F^r
,\]
and we then define
\[  
G_r T \da (F^r)^{-1} (T) \\
G_r B \da (F^r)^{-1} (B) 
\]
taken as scheme-theoretic objects.

Noting that $B\subset G_r B$, for $\lambda \in X(T)$ we define
\[  
\hat{Z}_r' (\lambda) &\da \ind_B^{G_r B} \lambda \\
\hat{Z}_r (\lambda) &\da \coind_B^{G_r B} \lambda
.\]

These are enhancements of the baby Verma modules, in the sense that if we take restrictions we get
\[  
\hat{Z}_r' (\lambda) \downarrow_{G_r} = \ind_{B_r}^{G_r} \lambda
.\]

We similarly have 
\[  
{Z}_r' (\lambda) \downarrow_{G_r T} &= \ind_{B_r T}^{G_r T} \lambda \\
\hat{Z}_r' (\lambda) \downarrow_{G_r T} &= \coind_{B_r T}^{G_r T} \lambda
.\]


:::{.proposition title="?"}
\envlist

1. $\hat{Z}_r(\lambda + p^r \mu) \cong \hat{Z}_r(\lambda) \tensor p^r \mu$
2. $\hat{Z}_r' (\lambda + p^r \mu) \cong \hat{Z}_r' (\lambda) \tensor p^r \mu$
3. $\ch \hat{Z}_r(\lambda) = \ch \hat{Z}_r' (\lambda) = e^\lambda \prod_{\alpha\in\Phi^+} {1 - e^{-p^r\mu} \over 1 - e^{-\alpha}}$.

:::

:::{.proof title="of 1 and 2"}
From the definition, we have
\[  
\hat{Z}_r'(\lambda + p^r \mu)
&= \ind_{B}^{G_r B} (\lambda + p^r \mu) \\
&= \ind_{B}^{G_r B} (\lambda \tensor  p^r \mu) \\
\cong \qty{\ind_B^{G_r B} \lambda} \tensor p^r\mu
.\]
Where in the last equality we've applied the tensor identity, noting that $p^r\mu$ is a 1-dimensional $G_r B\dash$module, since
\[  
G_r B \to G_r B/G_r = B^{(r)} = B/B_r
,\]
making it a representation by pullback.
:::

:::{.proof title="of 3"}
We can write
\[  
\hat{Z}_r(\lambda) = \dist(U_r) \tensor \lambda
,\]
and thus
\[  
\ch \hat{Z}_r(\lambda) 
&= e^{\lambda} \ch \dist(U_r)  \\
&= e^{\lambda} \prod_{\alpha\in \Phi^+}\qty{ 1 + e^{-\alpha} + \cdots + e^{-(p^r-1)\alpha} } \\
&= e^\lambda {1 - e^{-p^r \alpha} \over 1 - e^{-\alpha}} && \text{as a geometric series}
.\]
:::

The next theorem is related to the fact that when comparing these categories of modules, one is essentially a graded version of the other.

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Let $M\in\mods{G_rT}$, then TFAE:

1. $M$ is an injective $G_r T\dash$module.
2. $M$ is an injective $G_r\dash$module.

:::

Note that $G_r \normal G_r T$, where the quotient is $T^{(r)}$ which is twisted by Frobenius $r$ times.

:::{.proof title="?"}
We'll apply the Lydon-Hoschild-Serre spectral sequence: for $N$ a $G_r T\dash$module, 
\[  
E_2^{i, j} = \ext_{T^{(r)}}^{i}\qty{K, \ext_{G_r}^j\qty{N, M} } \abuts \ext_{G_r T}^{i+j}(N, M)
.\]

$2\implies 1$:

We first note that 2 implies $\ext_{G_r}^{>0}(N, M) = 0$, so the spectral sequence collapses and we have
\[  
\ext_{T}
.\]
:::


