# Tuesday February 18th

## Cancellation Theorems

**Theorem (Rearrangement):**
If a Morse function $f$ has 2 critical points with $f(p) < c < f(q)$ and $\ind(p) \geq \ind(q)$, then $\xi$ can be perturbed in a neighborhood of $f\inv(c)$ such that $W_p^s \intersect W_q^u = \emptyset$.

**First Cancellation:**
If $S_R \transverse S_L' = \theset{\pt}$, then the cobordism is diffeomorphic to a product.

**Second Cancellation:**
Suppose $(W, V_0, V_1)$ is a cobordism and $f: W\to \RR$ has two critical points.
If $S_R \cdot S_L' = \pm 1$, then $W^n \cong V_0 \cross [0, 1]$.

**Whitney's Trick:**
If $M, M' = M^m, M^n \subset V^{m+n}$ are closed submanifolds with $M\transverse M'$ such that $M, \nu(M')$ (the normal bundle) are oriented.
Assume $m+n \geq 5$ and $n\geq 3$, and if $m=1,2$ then assume $\pi_1(V\setmius M') \injects \pi_1(V)$.
Let $p, q$ be in the intersection, $\eps(p)\cdot \eps(q) = -1$ (local intersection numbers), and there exists a contractible loop $L\subset V$ such that

- $L = L_0 \union L_1$
- $L_0$ is smooth in $M$, $L_1$ is smooth in $M'$.
- $L_0, L_1$ go from $p$ to $q$.

And suppose each $L_i \intersect (M\intersect M' \setminus{p, q}) = \emptyset$.

Then

1. $h_0 = \id$,
2. $h_+ = \id$ near $M \intersect M' \setminus \theset{p, q}$
3. $h_1(M) \intersect M' = M \intersect M' \setminus\theset{p, q}$.


Recall homological intersection number:
If $M, N \subset V$ are closed smooth submanifolds, then for $[M], [N] \subset H_*(V)$, then $[M] \cdot [N] = \sum_{p\in M\transverse N} \eps(p)$.

*Sketch of proof:*

1. Given $L$, find a $D^2 \injects V$ that it bounds. 
  Note that $D^2$ may have self-intersections.

2. Continuous maps can be approximated by smooth maps, and smooth intersections can be perturbed to be transverse.
  This lets the disc be perturbed, and since $2+2\leq 5$, the self-intersection can be made zero.

3. Something else.


## Facts From Differential Geometry

Let $M$ be smooth, then there exists a Riemannian metric $\inner{\wait}{\wait}$ on $T_pM$ which is symmetric and positive definite.

Given $p, q\in M$ and a curve $c(t)$ from $p$ to $q$, we want a parallel transport map $f_c: T_pM \to T_q M$.

The exponential map: something that maps a neighborhood in $T_pM$ to a neighborhood of $p$ in $M$.
Take geodesics starting at $p$ and evaluate at $t=1$.

Geodesics: curves of global shortest length.

Normal bundle: for $M\subset V$, then $TM \subset \restrictionof{TV}{M}$ is a subbundle with a metric induced from the metric on $V$.
The normal bundle is $TM\perp$.
