---
title: "Algebra"
---

---

# Major Theorems

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}[Cauchy]}
For any prime $p$ dividing the order of $G$, there is an element $x$ of order $p$ (and thus a subgroup $H = \generators{x}$).
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}[Lagrange]}
If $H \leq G$ is a subgroup, then $\abs{H} \divides \abs{G}$.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}


\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}[Sylow 1]}
If $\abs{G} = n = \prod p_{i}^{a_{i}}$ as a prime factorization, then $G$ has subgroups of order $p_{i}^{a_{i}}$ for every $i$. Moreover, this holds for any $1 \leq r \leq a_{i}$.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}[Classification of finitely generated abelian groups]}
If $G$ is a finitely generated abelian group, then $G \cong F \oplus T$, where $F$ is free abelian and $T$ is a torsion group. If $\abs T = n$, then $T \cong \bigoplus \ZZ_{p_{i}^{\alpha_{i}}}$ where $n = \prod p_{i}^{\alpha_{i}}$ is some factorization of $n$ with the $p_{i}$ **not necessarily distinct**.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}}
Conjugacy classes partition $G$
\begin{align*}
|G|=|Z(G)| + \sum_{\text{One representative in each orbit}} |C_{G}\left(g_{i}\right) |
= \sum_{asdsa} [G: C(g_{i}) ]
.\end{align*}
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

Some nice lemmas:

- Every subgroup of a cyclic group is itself cyclic.

# Lecture 1 (Thu 15 Aug 2019)

> We'll be using Hungerford's Algebra text.Show that a finite abelian group that is not cyclic contains a subgroup which is isomorphic

## Definitions
The following definitions will be useful to know by heart:

- The order of a group
- Cartesian product
- Relations
- Equivalence relation
- Partition
- Binary operation
- Group
- Isomorphism
- Abelian group
- Cyclic group
- Subgroup
- Greatest common divisor
- Least common multiple
- Permutation
- Transposition
- Orbit
- Cycle
- The symmetric group $S^{n}$
- The alternating group $A_{n}$
- Even and odd permutations
- Cosets
- Index
- The direct product of groups
- Homomorphism
- Image of a function
- Inverse image of a function
- Kernel
- Normal subgroup
- Factor group
- Simple group

Here is a rough outline of the course:

- Group Theory
  - Groups acting on sets
  - Sylow theorems and applications
  - Classification
  - Free and free abelian groups
  - Solvable and simple groups
  - Normal series
- Galois Theory
  - Field extensions
  - Splitting fields
  - Separability
  - Finite fields
  - Cyclotomic extensions
  - Galois groups
  - Solvability by radicals
- Module theory
  - Free modules
  - Homomorphisms
  - Projective and injective modules
  - Finitely generated modules over a PID
- Linear Algebra
  - Matrices and linear transformations
  - Rank and determinants
  - Canonical forms
  - Characteristic polynomials
  - Eigenvalues and eigenvectors

## Preliminaries
\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
A **group** is an ordered pair $(G, \wait: G\cross G \to G)$ where $G$ is a set and $\wait$ is a binary operation, which satisfies the following axioms:

- Associativity: $(g_1 g_2)g_3 = g_1(g_2 g_3)$,
- Identity: $\exists e\in G \suchthat  ge = eg = g$,
- Inverses: $g\in G \implies \exists h\in G \suchthat gh = gh = e$.

\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

\wrapenv{\wrapenv{\Begin{example}}}
\hfill
- $(\ZZ, +)$
- $(\QQ, +)$
- $(\QQ\units, \times)$
- $(\RR\units, \times)$
- ($\GL(n, \RR), \times) = \theset{A \in \mathrm{Mat}_n \suchthat \det(A) \neq 0}$
- $(S_n, \circ)$

\wrapenv{\wrapenv{\End{example}}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
A subset $S \subseteq G$ is a **subgroup** of $G$ iff

1. $s_1, s_2 \in S \implies s_1 s_2 \in S$
2. $e\in S$
3. $s\in S \implies s\inv \in S$

\wrapenv{\End{definition}}


We denote such a subgroup $S \leq G$.

Examples of subgroups:

- $(\ZZ, +) \leq (\QQ, +)$
- $\SL(n, \RR) \leq \GL(n, \RR)$, where $\SL(n, \RR) = \theset{A\in \GL(n, \RR) \suchthat \det(A) = 1}$

## Cyclic Groups

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
A group $G$ is **cyclic** iff $G$ is generated by a single element.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{exercise}}
Show $\generators{g} = \theset{g^n \suchthat n\in\ZZ} \cong \intersect \theset{H \leq G \suchthat g \in H}$.
\wrapenv{\End{exercise}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}}
Let $G$ be a cyclic group, so $G \generators{g}$.

- If $\abs{G} = \infty$, then $G \cong \ZZ$.
- If $\abs{G} = n < \infty$, then $G \cong \ZZ_n$.

\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
Let $H \leq G$, and define a **right coset of $G$** by $aH = \theset{ah \suchthat H \in H}$. A similar definition can be made for **left cosets**.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

Then $aH = bH \iff b\inv a \in G$ and $Ha = Hb \iff ab\inv \in H$.

Some facts:

- Cosets partition $H$, i.e. $b\not\in H \implies aH \intersect bH = \theset{e}$.
- $\abs{H} = \abs{aH} = \abs{Ha}$ for all $a\in G$.

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}[Lagrange]}
If $G$ is a finite group and $H \leq G$, then $\abs{H} \divides \abs{G}$.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
A subgroup $N \leq G$ is **normal** iff $gN = Ng$ for all $g\in G$, or equivalently $gNg\inv \subseteq N$. I denote this $N \normal G$.

\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

When $N \normal G$, the set of left/right cosets of $N$ themselves have a group structure. So we define
$$G/N = \theset{gN \suchthat g\in G} \text{ where } (g_1 N)(g_2 N) = (g_1 g_2) N.
$$

Given $H, K \leq G$, define $HK = \theset{hk \suchthat h\in H, k\in K}$. We have a general formula,
$$
\abs{HK} = \frac{\abs H \abs K}{\abs{H \intersect K}}.
$$

## Homomorphisms

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
Let $G,G'$ be groups, then $\varphi: G \to G'$ is a **homomorphism** if $\varphi(ab) = \varphi(a) \varphi(b)$.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{example}}

- $\exp: (\RR, +) \to (\RR^{> 0}, \wait)$ where $\exp(a+b) = e^{a+b} = e^a e^b = \exp(a) \exp(b)$.
- $\det: (\GL(n, \RR), \times) \to (\RR\units, \times)$ where $\det(AB) = \det(A) \det(B)$.
- Let $N \normal G$ and $\varphi G \to G/N$ given by $\varphi(g) = gN$.
- Let $\varphi: \ZZ \to \ZZ_n$ where $\phi(g) = [g] = g \mod n$ where $\ZZ_n \cong \ZZ/n\ZZ$

\wrapenv{\End{example}}


\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
Let $\varphi: G \to G'$. Then $\varphi$ is a **monomorphism** iff it is injective, an **epimorphism** iff it is surjective, and an **isomorphism** iff it is bijective.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

## Direct Products
Let $G_1, G_2$ be groups, then define
$$
G_1 \cross G_2 = \theset{(g_1, g_2) \suchthat g_1 \in G, g_2 \in G_2} \text{ where } (g_1, g_2)(h_1, h_2) = (g_1 h_1, g_2 ,h_2).
$$

We have the formula $\abs{G_1 \cross G_2} = \abs{G_1} \abs{G_2}$.

## Finitely Generated Abelian Groups

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
We say a group is **abelian** if $G$ is commutative, i.e. $g_1, g_2 \in G \implies g_1 g_2 = g_2 g_1$.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{definition}}
A group is **finitely generated** if there exist $\theset{g_1, g_2, \cdots g_n} \subseteq G$ such that $G = \generators{g_1, g_2, \cdots g_n}$.
\wrapenv{\End{definition}}

This generalizes the notion of a cyclic group, where we can simply intersect all of the subgroups that contain the $g_i$ to define it.

We know what cyclic groups look like -- they are all isomorphic to $\ZZ$ or $\ZZ_n$. So now we'd like a structure theorem for abelian finitely generated groups.

\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}}
Let $G$ be a finitely generated abelian group. Then
$$G \cong \ZZ^r \times \displaystyle\prod_{i=1}^s \ZZ_{p_i^{\alpha _i}}$$
for some finite $r,s \in \NN$ and $p_i$ are (not necessarily distinct) primes.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{example}}
Let $G$ be a finite abelian group of order 4. Then $G \cong \ZZ_4$ or $\ZZ_2^2$, which are not isomorphic because every element in $\ZZ_2^2$ has order 2 where $\ZZ_4$ contains an element of order 4.
\wrapenv{\End{example}}

## Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem

Let $\varphi: G \to G'$ be a group homomorphism and define
$\ker \varphi = \theset{g\in G \suchthat \varphi(g) = e'}$.

### The First Homomorphism Theorem
\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}}
There exists a map $\varphi': G/\ker \varphi \to G'$ such that the following diagram commutes:
\[
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
G \arrow[dd, "\eta"'] \arrow[rr, "\varphi", dotted] &  & G' \\
&  &    \\
G/\ker \varphi \arrow[rruu, "\varphi'"]             &  &
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
\]

That is, $\varphi = \varphi' \circ \eta$, and $\varphi'$ is an isomorphism onto its image, so $G/\ker \varphi = \im \varphi$. This map is given by $\varphi'(g(\ker \varphi)) = \varphi(g)$.
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}


\wrapenv{\Begin{exercise}}
Check that $\varphi$ is well-defined.
\wrapenv{\End{exercise}}

### The Second Theorem
\wrapenv{\Begin{theorem}}
Let $K, N \leq G$ where $N \normal G$. Then
$$
\frac K {N \intersect K} \cong \frac {NK} N
$$
\wrapenv{\End{theorem}}

\wrapenv{\Begin{proof}}
Define a map $K \mapsvia{\varphi} NK/N$ by $\varphi(k) = kN$. You can show that $\varphi$ is onto by looking at $\ker \varphi$; note that $kN = \varphi(k) = N \iff k \in N$, and so $\ker \varphi = N \intersect K$.
\wrapenv{\End{proof}}

# Lecture 2

Last time: the fundamental homomorphism theorems.

Theorem 1:
Let $\varphi: G \to G'$ be a homomorphism. Then there is a canonical homomorphism $\eta: G \to G/\ker \varphi$ such that the usual diagram commutes. Moreover, this map induces an isomorphism $G /\ker \varphi \cong \im \varphi$.

Theorem 2: Let $K, N \leq G$ and suppose $N \normal G$. Then there is an isomorphism
$$
\frac K {K \intersect N} \cong \frac {NK} {N}
$$
(Show that $K \intersect N \normal G$, and $NK$ is a subgroup exactly because $N$ is normal).

Theorem 3: Let $H, K \normal G$ such that $H \leq K$.

1. $H/K$ is normal in $G/K$.
2. The quotient $(G/K) / (H/K) \cong G/H$.

Proof: We'll use the first theorem. First make a map
$$
G/K \to G/H \\
\phi(gk) = gH
$$

Exercise:
Show that this map is onto, and that $\ker \phi \cong H/K$.


## Permutation Groups
Let $A$ be a set, then a *permutation* on $A$ is a bijective map $A \selfmap$. This can be made into a group with a binary operation given by composition of functions. Denote $S_{A}$ the set of permutations on $A$.

Theorem: $S_{A}$ is in fact a group. Check associativity, inverses, identity, etc.

In the special case that $A = \theset{1, 2, \cdots n}$, then $S_{n} \coloneqq S_{A}$.

Recall two line notation
$$
\left(\begin{matrix}
1 & 2 & \cdots & n\\
\sigma(1) & \sigma(2) & \cdots & \sigma(n)
\end{matrix}\right)
$$

Moreover, $\abs{S_{n}} = n!$ by a combinatorial counting argument.

Example: $S_{3}$ is the symmetries of a triangle (see notes).

Example: The symmetries of a square are *not* given by $S_{4}$, it is instead $D_{4}$ (see notes).

## Orbits
Permutations $S_{A}$ "acts" on $A$, and if $\sigma \in S_{A}$, then $\generators{\sigma}$ also acts on $A$.

Define $a \sim b$ iff there is some $n$ such that $\sigma^{n}(a) = b$. This is an equivalence relation, and thus induces a partition of $A$. See notes for diagram. The equivalence classes under this relation are called the *orbits* under $\sigma$.

Example:
$$
\left(\begin{matrix}
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 \\
8 & 2 & 6 & 3 & 7 & 4 & 5 & 1
\end{matrix}\right) = (1 8)(2)(3 6 4)(5 7).
$$

Definition:
A permutation $\sigma \in S_{n}$ is a *cycle* iff it contains at most one orbit with more than one element. The *length* of a cycle is the number of elements in the largest orbit.

Recall cycle notation: $\sigma = (\sigma(1) \sigma(2) \cdots \sigma(n))$. Note that this is read right-to-left by convention!

Theorem:
Every permutation $\sigma \in S_{n}$ can be written as a product of disjoint cycles.

Definition:
A *transposition* is a cycle of length 2. Moreover, we have
<!--$$-->
<!--(a_{1) a_{2} \cdots a_{n}) = (a_{1) a_{n})(a_{1) a_{n-1}) \cdots (a_{1) a_{2}), -->
<!--$$-->

and so every permutation is a product of transpositions. This is not a unique decomposition, however, as e.g. $\id = (1 2)^{2} = (3 4)^{2}$.

Theorem:
Any $\sigma \in S_{n}$ can be written as **either** an even number of transpositions or an odd number of transpositions.

Define $A_{n} = \theset{\sigma \in S_{n} \suchthat \sigma\text{ is even}}$. We claim that $A_{n} \normal S_{n}$.

1. Closure: If $\tau_{1}, \tau_{2}$ are both even, then $\tau_{1}\tau_{2}$ also has an even number of transpositions.


