# Monday, April 26

:::{.remark}
Last time: semisimple Lie algebras.
For today, let $\lieg \in \liealg$ be finite dimensional over $k$ a field with $\ch(k) = 0$.
We saw that $\lieg$ is semisimple iff $\lieg \cong \bigoplus \lieg_i$ with each $\lieg$ simple, which implies $[\lieg_i \lieg_i] = \lieg_i$.
As a corollary, $H_1(\lieg; k) = 0 = H^1(\lieg ; k)$ by considering the abelianization of $\lieg$.
We'll now discuss a corollary.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
If $\lieg$ is semisimple, then for all $M\in \liegmod$ finite dimensional, $H^1(\lieg; M) = 0$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that these were outer derivations, so this implies that every derivation is inner.
In fact, this result is an iff by Weibel exercise 7.8.4.
:::

:::{.proof title="$\implies$"}
Induct on $n \da \dim_k M$.
For $n=1$, $M=k$ is the trivial $\lieg\dash$module, so applying the previous corollary shows that $H^1$ vanishes.
Now for $n>1$, if $M$ is simple we can use the previous theorem.
Otherwise, $M$ has a proper nonzero $\lieg\dash$submodule $L \leq M$, and inductively $H^1(\lieg; L) = 0$.
We also have $M/L$ of smaller dimension than $M$, so $H^1(\lieg; M/L) = 0$ as well.
So take the SES
\[
0 \to L \to M \to M/L \to 0
,\]
and take the LES in cohomology to conclude the proof:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots \\
	\\
	{H^1(\lieg; L) = 0} && \textcolor{rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}{H^1(\lieg; M)} & {} & {H^1(\lieg; M/L) = 0} \\
	\\
	&& \cdots && {H^0(\lieg; L)}
	\arrow[from=5-5, to=3-1]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=1-1]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNyxbMCwyLCJIXjEoXFxsaWVnOyBMKSA9IDAiXSxbMiwyLCJIXjEoXFxsaWVnOyBNKSIsWzAsNjAsNjAsMV1dLFszLDJdLFs0LDIsIkheMShcXGxpZWc7IE0vTCkgPSAwIl0sWzQsNCwiSF4wKFxcbGllZzsgTCkiXSxbMiw0LCJcXGNkb3RzIl0sWzAsMCwiXFxjZG90cyJdLFs0LDBdLFswLDFdLFsxLDNdLFszLDZdXQ==)

Hence $H^1(\lieg; M) = 0$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Weyl's Theorem"}
If $\lieg$ is semisimple, then every finite-dimensional $\lieg\dash$module is completely reducible, i.e. it decomposes as a direct sum of irreducible submodules.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Essentially an inductive argument.
Suppose the result is false and choose a minimal counterexample: a finite dimensional $\lieg\dash$module $M_1$ that is not completely reducible where every smaller dimensional module *is* complete reducible.
Simple modules are completely reducible, since they're direct summand of themselves, so $M_1$ is not simple.
Thus we can choose $M_0 \leq M_1$ a nonzero proper submodule, and inductively $M_0, M_1/M_0$ are completely reducible.
So the following SES can not be split:
\[
0 \to M_0 \to M_1 \to M_2 \da M_1/M_0 \to 0
.\]
If it were, then $M_1 \cong M_0 \oplus M_2$ would be reducible, a contradiction.
So there is a nontrivial $\Ext^1_{\Ug}(M_2, M_0)$, since this classifies extensions, the split extension is trivial, and non-split extensions yield nontrivial elements in this group.
By exercise 7.3.5, we can use a nice trick:
\[
0\neq \Ext^1_{\Ug}(M_2, M_0) \cong H^1( \lieg, \Hom_{\kmod}(M_2, M_0) )
.\]
However, this being nonzero contradicts Whitehead's lemma.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that finite-dimensional is a very necessary condition.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Whitehead's Second Lemma"}
If $M \in \liegmod$ is finite dimensional and $\lieg$ is semisimple, then $H^2(\lieg; M) = 0$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Question from DZG: what do we know about $H^*(\liesl_2(\CC), M)$?
By exercise 7.7.3, it turns out that $H^3(\liesl_2(\CC), k) = k$.
Thus

1. There is no "Whitehead's Third Lemma" for $H^3$,
2. We know $H^*(\liesl_2; M)$ for all $M \in \modsleft{\liesl_2}$:
  Since $\dim \liesl_2 = 3$ (using that $\dim \liegl_2 = 4$ and we impose one linear condition), we have $H^{>3} = 0$.
  We also know it's 0 for $n=3$ if $M$ is simple and not equal to $k$, and we know what it is for $k$.
  For non-simple modules, if $M$ is finite dimensional, we have $M \cong \bigoplus M_i$ with each $M_i$ simple by Weyl's theorem, and $H^n(\lieg, \wait)$ commutes with direct sums.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Levi"}
Let $\lieg \in \liealg$ be finite-dimensional, not necessarily semisimple.
Then there exists a semisimple Lie-subalgebra $\liel$ called the **Levi factor** (or **Levi subalgebra**) such that $\lieg \cong \rad \lieg \semidirect \liel$.
[^refname]

This is defined as $\rad\lieg \cross \liel$ as the underlying $k\dash$module with bracket
\[
[ (r, x), (s, y) ] = ([xs]-[yr], [xy])
.\]

[^refname]: 
Note that the angle points to the ideal in the semidirect product, and $\rad\lieg$ is the largest solvable ideal.

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Omitted, uses a characterization of $H^2$ that we haven't discussed yet and Whitehead's 2nd lemma.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that any $r\in \rad\lieg$ corresponds to $(r, 0)$, and bracketing it with anything causes $[xs]=0$ and more importantly $[xy]=0$, so this lands back in $\rad\lieg$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Reductive Lie Algebras"}
A Lie algebra $\lieg$ is **reductive** if $\lieg$ is completely reducible as a $\lieg\dash$module by the adjoint action.
:::


:::{.remark}
Note that submodules under the adjoint action are ideals, which are $k\dash$submodules closed under bracketing with everything.
In this situation, $\lieg$ is a direct sum of simple (or possibly 1-dimensional trivial) $\lieg\dash$module.
Moreover, $\lieg \cong Z(\lieg) \oplus [\lieg \lieg]$, and in fact $Z(\lieg) \cong \bigoplus_{i=1}^{m} k$ for some $m$.
The second part $[\lieg \lieg]$ is a direct sum of simple ideals, and in characteristic zero, this is the Levi decomposition.
So $[\lieg \lieg] = \liel$ and $\rad \lieg = \lieg$, and thus $\lieg$ is the sum of an abelian (the radical $Z(\lieg)$) and a semisimple (the Levi factor $[\lieg \lieg]$) Lie algebra.
:::


:::{.remark}
Note that there are 3 characterizations here:

1. $[\lieg \lieg] = \liel$
2. $\rad \lieg = Z(\lieg)$
3. $\lieg$ is the sum of an abelian and semisimple algebra.

In characteristic zero, theses are all equivalent to $\lieg$ being reductive.
:::


:::{.example title="The prototypical reductive Lie algebra"}
Take $\liegl_m = k \oplus \liesl_m$, where $k$ denotes the scalar matrices $Z(\lieg)$.
Noting that $\Tr([xy]) = \Tr(xy-yx) = 0$ since the trace doesn't depend on multiplicative order, $\liesl_m$ are trace zero matrices and thus form a simple algebra.
:::

:::{.slogan}
Reductive Lie algebras are very close to being simple.
:::

:::{.remark}
Many results about simple Lie algebras extend naturally to reductive algebras.
Technique: to prove things about semisimple Lie algebras, look for smaller reductive subalgebras and use induction.
These show up in **parabolic subalgebras**, which have a reductive Levi factor.
:::


:::{.warnings}
There is a common false belief that any finite dimensional representation of a reductive Lie algebra should be semisimple, i.e. that Weyl's theorem should extended to reductive algebras.
:::


:::{.example title="Finite dimensional reductive doesn't imply completely reducible"}
Finite dimensional representations of reductive algebras need not be completely reducible.
Take $\lieg \da \CC$ with basis $x$, a 1-dimensional abelian Lie algebra (sometimes called a 1-dimensional torus), and take $M \da \CC^2 = \CC \gens{ v, w }$ and define an action of $\lieg\actson M$ by the matrix
\[
A\da 
\begin{bmatrix}
0 & 1 
\\
0 & 0
\end{bmatrix}
,\]
so $x\cdot v = 0v + 0w$ and $x\cdot w = 1v + 0w$.
This preserves the bracket trivially, and the commutator of any matrix with itself is always zero since it's equal to $A^2 - A^2$.
Note that \( \CC v \subseteq M  \) is a $\lieg\dash$invariant subspace, but there is no $\lieg\dash$invariant complement: taking any other vector $\vector y\da av + bw$, one can compute
\[
x\cdot \vector y \da x(av+bw) = bv
,\]
and this can only be of the form $\lambda \vector y$ if $b=0$ and $a=b$, which forces $a=0$.
This is certainly a reductive Lie algebra, since $Z(\lieg) = \lieg$ and the semisimple part $[\lieg\lieg] = 0$, but this is not completely reducible.
:::


:::{.question}
Can you find a finite dimensional representation of $\liegl(2, \CC)$ that is not completely reducible?
The previous example is cheating a little since it's a torus and there's no semisimple part, but what if that part is nontrivial?
Here the 1-dimensional center doesn't have to act in a completely reducible manner.
:::



