---
title: "Problem Set 3"
notoc: true
---

:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 2.33"}
Define
\[  
X \da \ts{M \in \mat(2\times 3, k) \st \rk M \leq 1} \subseteq \AA^6/k
.\]

Show that $X$ is an irreducible variety, and find its dimension.
:::

:::{.solution}
We'll use the following fact from linear algebra:

:::{.definition title="Matrix Minor"}
For an $m\times n$ matrix, a *minor of order* $\ell$ is the determinant of a $\ell\times \ell$ submatrix obtained by deleting any $m-\ell$ rows and any $n-\ell$ columns.
:::
:::{.theorem title="Rank is a Function of Minors"}
If $A\in \Mat(m \times n, k)$ is a matrix, then the rank of $A$ is equal to the order of largest nonzero minor.
:::

Thus 
\[  
M_{ij} = 0 \text{ for all $\ell\times \ell$ minors } M_{ij} \iff \rk(M) < \ell
,\]
following from the fact that if one takes $\ell = \min(m,n)$ and all $\ell\times \ell$ minors vanish, then the largest nonzero minor must be of size $j\times j$ for $j\leq \ell -1$.
But $\det M_{ij}$ is a polynomial $f_{ij}$ in its entries, which means that $X$ can be written as
\[  
X = V\qty{\ts{f_{ij}}}
,\]
which exhibits $X$ as a variety.
Thus 
\[  
M = 
\begin{bmatrix}
x & y & z \\
a & b & c
\end{bmatrix}
\implies
X = V\qty{\gens{xb-ya, yc-zb, xc-za}} \subset \AA^6 
.\]

That $X$ is irreducible follows from the fact that all of the generators in the above ideal are irreducible polynomials, thus generating a prime ideal, and so the coordinate ring $A(X)$ is a domain.
:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 2.34"}
Let $X$ be a topological space, and show

a. If $\ts{U_i} \covers X$, then $\dim X = \sup_{i\in I} \dim U_i$.

b. If $X$ is an irreducible affine variety and $U\subset X$ is a nonempty subset, then $\dim X = \dim U$.
  Does this hold for any irreducible topological space?
:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 2.36"}
Prove the following:

a. Every noetherian topological space is compact.
  In particular, every open subset of an affine variety is compact in the Zariski topology.

b. A complex affine variety of dimension at least 1 is never compact in the classical topology.

:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 2.40"}
Let
\[  
R = k[x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4] / \gens{x_1 x_4 - x_2 x_3} 
\]
and show the following:

a. $R$ is an integral domain of dimension 3.

b. $x_1, \cdots, x_4$ are irreducible but not prime in $R$, and thus $R$ is not a UFD.

c. $x_1 x_4$ and $x_2 x_3$ are two decompositions of the same element in $R$ which are nonassociate.

d. $\gens{x_1, x_2}$ is a prime ideal of codimension 1 in $R$ that is not principal.


:::


:::{.exercise title="Problem 5"}
Consider a set $U$ in the complement of $(0, 0) \in \AA^2$.
Prove that any regular function on $U$ extends to a regular function on all of $\AA^2$.

:::




