# Tuesday, September 01

Last time: $V(I) = \ts{x\in \AA^n \st f(x) = 0 \, \forall x\in I}$ and $I(X) = \ts{f\in k[x_1, \cdots, x_n] \st f(x) = 0\, \forall x\in X}$.
We proved the Hilbert Nullstellensatz $I(V(J)) = \sqrt{J}$, defined the coordinate ring of an affine variety $X$ as $A(X) \da k[x_1, \cdots, x_n] / I(X)$, the ring of "regular" (polynomial) functions on $X$.

Recall that a *topology* on $X$ can be defined as a collection of "closed" subsets of $X$ that are closed under arbitrary intersections and finite unions.
A subset $Y\subset X$ inherits a subspace topology with closed sets of the form $Z\intersect Y$ for $Z\subset X$ closed.


:::{.definition title="Zariski Topology"}
Let $X$ be an affine variety.
The closed sets are affine subvarieties $Y\subset X$.
:::


We have $\emptyset, X$ closed, since 

1. $V_X(1) = \emptyset$,
2. $V_X(0) = X$

Closure under finite unions:
Let $V_X(I), V_X(J)$ be closed in $X$ with $I, J \subset A(X)$ ideals.
Then $V_X(IJ) = V_X(I) \union V_X(J)$.

Closure under intersections:
We have $\bigcap_{i\in \sigma} V_X(J) = V_X\qty{ \sum_{i\in \sigma} J_i}$.

:::{.remark}
There are few closed sets, so this is a "weak" topology.
:::


:::{.example}
Compare the classical topology on $\AA^1/\CC$ to the Zariski topology.

Consider the set 
$A\da \ts{x\in \AA^1/\CC \st \norm{x} \leq 1}$, 
which is closed in the classical topology.

But $A$ is not closed in the Zariski topology, since the closed subsets are finite sets or the whole space.

> Here the topology is in fact the cofinite topology.

:::

:::{.example}
Let $f: \AA^1/k\to \AA^1/k$ be any injective map.
Then $f$ is necessarily continuous wrt the Zariski topology.
:::

Thus the notion of continuity is too weak in this situation.

:::{.example}
Consider $X\cross Y$ a product of affine varieties.
Then there is a product topology where open sets are of the form $\union_{i=1}^n U_i \cross V_i$ with $U_i, V_i$ open in $X, Y$ respectively.

This is the wrong topology!
On $\AA^1 \cross \AA^1 = \AA^2$, the diagonal $\Delta \da V(x-y)$ is closed in the Zariski topology on $\AA^2$ but not in the product topology.
:::






