---
title: "Problem Set 1"
---

> Source: [Section 1 of Gathmann](https://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~gathmann/class/alggeom-2019/alggeom-2019-c1.pdf)

:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.19"}
Prove that every affine variety $X\subset \AA^n/k$ consisting of only finitely many points can be written as the zero locus of $n$ polynomials.

> Hint: Use interpolation. 
  It is useful to assume at first that all points in $X$ have different $x_1\dash$coordinates.

:::

:::{.solution}
Let $X = \ts{p_1, \cdots, p_d} =\ts{p_j}_{j=1}^d$, where each $p_j$ can be written in coordinates $p_j \da \thevector{p_j^1, p_j^2, \cdots, p_j^n}$.

**Claim**:
Without loss of generality, we can assume all of the first components $\ts{p_j^1}_{j=1}^d$ are distinct.

> Todo: by some change of basis? 

We will use the following fact

:::{.theorem title="Lagrange"}
Given a set of $d$ points $\ts{(x_i, y_i)}_{i=1}^d$ with all $x_i$ distinct, there exists a unique polynomial of degree $d$ in $f \in k[x]$ such that $\tilde f(x_i) = y_i$ for every $i$.

This can be explicitly given by
\[  
\tilde f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^d y_i \qty{\prod_{\substack{0\leq m \leq d \\ m\neq i}} \qty{x - x_m \over x_i - x_m }}
.\]

Equivalently, there is a polynomial $f$ defined by $f(x_i) = \tilde f(x_i) - y_i$ of degree $d$ whose roots are precisely the $x_i$.
:::

Using this theorem, we define a system of $n$ polynomials in the following way:

- Define $f_1 \in k[x_1] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by $$f_1(x) = \prod_{i=1}^d \qty{x - p_i^1}.$$
  Then the roots of $f_1$ are precisely the first components of the points $p$.

- Define $f_2 \in k[x_1, x_2] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by considering the ordered pairs $$\ts{(x_1, x_2) = (p_j^1, p_j^2)},$$ then taking the unique Lagrange interpolating polynomial satisfying $f_2(p_j^1) = p_j^2$ for all $1\leq j \leq d$.

- Define $f_3 \in k[x_1, x_3] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by considering the ordered pairs $$\ts{(x_1, x_3) = (p_j^1, p_j^3)},$$ then taking the unique Lagrange interpolating polynomial satisfying $f_2(p_j^1) = p_j^3$ for all $1\leq j \leq d$.

- $\cdots$
 
Continuing in this way up to $f_n \in k[x_1, x_n]$ yields a system of $n$ polynomials.

**Claim**:
$V(f_1, \cdots, f_n) = X$.

$X\subset V(f_1, \cdots, f_n)$:
This follows by construction; letting $p_j\in X$ be arbitrary, we find that 
\[  
f(p_j) = \prod_{i=1}^d
.\]



:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.21"}
Determine $\sqrt{I}$ for 
\[  
I\da \gens{x_1^3 - x_2^6,\, x_1 x_2 - x_2^3} \normal \CC[x_1, x_2]
.\]
:::

:::{.solution}
For notational purposes, let $\mathcal{I}, \mathcal{V}$ denote the maps in Hilbert's Nullstellensatz, we then have 
$$(\mathcal{I} \circ \mathcal{V})(I) = \sqrt{I}.$$

So we consider $\mathcal{V}(I) \subseteq \AA^2/\CC$, the vanishing locus of these two polynomials, which yields the system
\[  
\begin{cases}
x^3 - y^6 & = 0 \\
xy - y^3 & = 0.
\end{cases}
\]
In the second equation, we have $(x- y^2)y = 0$, and since $\CC[x, y]$ is an integral domain, one term must be zero.

1. If $y=0$, then $x^3 = 0 \implies x= 0$, and thus $(0, 0) \in \mathcal{V}(I)$ ,i.e. the origin is contained in this vanishing locus.

2. Otherwise, if $x-y^2 = 0$, then $x=y^2$, with no further conditions coming from the first equation.
  So $$P\da \ts{(t^2, t) \suchthat t\in \CC} \subset \mathcal{V}(I).$$

  The corresponding ideal

Since the origin is in the latter set, this simplifies to $P = \mathcal{V}(I)$, and so taking the ideal generated by $P$ yields
\[  
\qty{\mathcal{I} \circ \mathcal{V}} (I) = \mathcal{I}(P) = \gens{y-x^2} \in \CC[x ,y]
\]

and thus $\sqrt{I} = \gens{y-x^2}$.

:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.22"}
Let $X\subset \AA^3/k$ be the union of the three coordinate axes.
Compute generators for the ideal $I(X)$ and show that it can not be generated by fewer than 3 elements.
:::

:::{.solution}
**Claim**: \[I(X) = \gens{x_1 x_2,\, x_1 x_3,\, x_2 x_3}.\]
:::



:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.23: Relative Nullstellensatz"}
Let $Y\subset \AA^n/k$ be an affine variety and define $A(Y)$ by the quotient 
\[  
\pi: k[x_1,\cdots, x_n] \to A(Y) \da k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]/I(Y)
.\]

a. Show that $V_Y(J) = V(\pi^{-1}(J)$ for every $J\normal A(Y)$.

b. Show that $\pi^{-1} (I_Y(X)) = I(X)$ for every affine subvariety $X\subseteq Y$.

c. Using the fact that $I(V(J)) \subset \sqrt{J}$ for every $J\normal k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$, deduce that $I_Y(V_Y(J)) \subset \sqrt{J}$ for every $J\normal A(Y)$.

  Conclude that there is an inclusion-reversing bijection
  \[  
  \correspond{\text{Affine subvarieties}\\ \text{of } Y} \iff \correspond{\text{Radical ideals} \\ \text{in } A(Y)}
  .\]
  

:::


:::{.exercise title="Extra"}
Let $J \normal k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ be an ideal, and find a counterexample to $I(V(J)) =\sqrt{J}$ when $k$ is not algebraically closed.
:::

