# Wednesday July 15th

Let $R$ be a unital (not necessarily commutative) ring, then we can consider two categories:

- $\rmod$: the category of left $R\dash$modules
- $\modr$: the category of right $R\dash$modules

Let $X\in \modr$ a consider the functor
\begin{align*}
X\tensor_R \wait: \rmod \to \ZZ\dash\text{mod} \\
Y &\mapsto X\tensor_R Y
.\end{align*}

Given a short exact sequence, we obtain a right-exact sequence, i.e. this functor is right-exact and the induced map $X\tensor_R A \to X\tensor_R B$ need not be injective.
Example:

\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \ar[r] & \ZZ \ar[r, "\cdot 2"] & \ZZ \ar[r] & \ZZ/(2) \ar[r] & 0 \\
\ar[d] \\
?? \ar[r] & \ZZ/(2) \ar[r, "f_*"] & \ZZ/(2) \ar[r] & \ZZ/(2) \tensor_\ZZ \ZZ/(2) \ar[r] & 0
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
Then $f_*$ is not injective, since $(\id \tensor_\ZZ \text{mult2}(T\tensor 1)) = T\tensor 2 = 2T\tensor 1 = 0$.

Recall that this has derived functors $\tor_i^R(X, \wait)$ which vanish if either component is projective and yields a LES.

Definition
: An $R\dash$module $X$ is *flat* if $X\tensor_R \wait$ is exact.


Recall that free $\implies$ projective $\implies$ flat.

Construction of $\tor_i^R(X, Y)$:

1. $\rmod$ has enough projectives, so take a projective resolution of $Y$, $P_\wait: \cdots \to P_2 \to P_1 \to P_0 \to Y \to 0$ with each $P_j$ projective.
2. Apply $X\tensor_R \wait$ to $P_\wait$: $X\tensor_R\wait P_\wait: \cdots \to X_\tensor_R P_2 \to X\tensor_R P_1 \to X\tensor_R P_0 \to 0$. 
  Note that this is a chain complex, but not exact in general.

3. Define $\tor_i^R(X, Y) \definedas H_i(X\tensor_R P_\wait)$, i.e. take kernels mod images.

Note that choices were made, is this independent (up to natural isomorphism) of the chosen projective resolution $P_\wait$?

Lemma
:   Let $f: Y\to Y' \in \rmod$, and let $P_\wait, P_\wait'$ be respective projective resolutions.
    Then there exists a map of chain complexes $\tilde f: P_\wait \to P_\wait'$.
