# Tuesday July 14th

Remarks
:   \hfill
    - The KL basis can be complicated -- you can compute them recursively, but may need to subtract off "constant coefficients" to obtain self-dual elements.
    - There are no closed formulas in general.
    - For any $P\in ! + q \ZZ^{\geq 0}[q]$ there exists an $m\in \ZZ$ such that $v^m P(v^{-2})$ occurs as a KL-polynomial.
    - The KL Positivity Conjecture: $h_{x, w} \in \ZZ^{\geq 0} [v]$, and in fact these non-negative coefficients can be realized as the graded dimension of the local intersection cohomology of Schubert varieties.


Why care?
Set $\lieg = \liesl(n, \CC) = \theset{A\in \CC^{n\times n} \suchthat \tr(A) = 0}$ with $[AB] = AB - BA$.
The case of finite-dimensional representations is well understood, since everything decomposes into simple modules.
In the infinite case, we consider the principal block of category $\OO$: $\OO_0(\lieg)$.
There is a correspondence
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
\correspond{Simple modules in $\OO_0$ } & \ar[l] S_n \ar[r] & \correspond{Verma modules in $\OO_0$} \\
L(w) & \ar[l] w \ar[r] & \Delta(w)
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
where $L(w)$ are weight modules.

The KL-multiplicity conjecture states $[\Delta(w) : L(x)] = h_{x, w}(1)$, where the LHS counts how often $L(x)$ occurs as a subquotient in a composition series for $\Delta(w)$.
Determining the characters $\ch L(w)$ can be done using translation functors, and corresponds to determining the characters of all simple highest weight modules (not necessarily finite-dimensional), and is a vast generalization of Weyl's character formula.

This was the birth of geometric representation theory, and the proof involved $D\dash$modules, perverse sheaves, and Deligne's proof of the Weil conjectures.

Goal: categorify $\mch_n(S_n)$, the associative unital $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$algebra given by $\gens{\theset{H_i \suchthat i\leq n-1}}$ subject to
\begin{align*}
H_{s_{i+1}}
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{i+1}} = 
H_{s_{i+1}}
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{i+1}} \\
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{j}}
=
H_{s_{j}}
H_{s_{i}} \quad \abs{i-j} \geq 2 \\
H_{s_{i}}^2 = (v\inv - v) H_{s_i} + 1
.\end{align*}

Or equivalently, setting $C_{s_i} = H_{s_i} + v$,
\begin{align*}
C_{s_{i+1}}
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{i+1}}  + C_{s_i} = 
C_{s_{i+1}}
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{i+1}} + C_{s_{i+1}} \\
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{j}}
=
C_{s_{j}}
C_{s_{i}} \quad \abs{i-j} \geq 2 \\
C_{s_{i}}^2 = (v\inv - v) H_{s_i} + 1
.\end{align*}

Remark
: The presentation above can be "lifted" to a categorical level.

So we want to find a category $\mca$ which is additive, monoidal, graded, and abelian such that

- $K_0^\oplus(\mca) \cong H(S_n)$ is an isomorphism of $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$algebras.
- There are objects $B_{s_i}$ such that

  - $B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_i} \cong B_{s_i}(1) \oplus B_{s_i}(-1)$
  - $B_{s_j} \tensor B_{s_i} \cong B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_j}$ for $\abs{i-j} \geq 2$
  - $B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_{i+1}} \tensor B_{s_i} \oplus B_{s_{i+1}} \cong B_{s_{i+1}} \tensor B_{s_{i}} \tensor B_{s_{i+1}} \oplus B_{s_{i}}$.

Question 1: What are the objects $B_{s_i}$? 
Set $R = \CC[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ with $\abs{x_i} = 2$, yielding a graded $\CC\dash$algebra where $s_i$ permutes $x_i, x_{i+1}$.
We can look at the invariant ring $R^{s_i} \definedas \theset{f\in R \suchthat s_i f = f}$.
So set $B_{s_i} \dienfedas R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-1)$, which is a graded $R\dash$bimodule.


