# Monday, February 15


## 2.5: Right-Derived Functors

:::{.remark}
Today: right-derived functors of a left-exact functor.
Luckily we can use some opposite category tricks which save us some work of re deriving everything.
:::

:::{.definition title="Right Derived Functors"}
Let \( F: \cat{A} \to \cat{B}  \) be left-exact where \( \cat{A} \) has enough injectives.
Given \( A \in \cat{A} \), fix an injective resolution \( 0 \to A \mapsvia{\eps} I\) and define
\[
R^i \cat{F} \da H^i( FA ) && i \geq 0 
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Then 
\[
0 \to FA \mapsvia{F\eps} FI^0 \mapsvia{Fd^)} FI^1
\]
is exact,
and 
\[
R^0 FA = \ker FD^0 / \gens{ 0 } = \im F\eps \cong FA
,\]
and so there is naturally an isomorphism $R^0 F \cong F$.
Observe that \( F \) yields a right-exact functor $F^\op: \cat{A}^\op \to \cat{B}^\op$, where we note that $F^\op (f^\op) = F(f)^\op$.
Note that taking the opposite category sends injectives to projectives and so \( \cat{A}^\op \) has enough projectives.
This means that $L_i F^\op$ are defined using the projective resolution $I$, so we have
\[
R^i F(A) = (L_i F^\op)^\op
.\]
Thus all results about left-derived functors translate to right-derived functors:

- $R_i F$ is independent of the choice of injective resolution, up to a natural isomorphism.
- If $A$ is injective, then $R^{i>0} F(A) = 0$.
- The collection \( \ts{ R^i F } _{i\geq 0 } \) forms a universal cohomological \( \delta\dash \)functor for \( F \).
- An object \( Q \in \cat{A} \) is **$F\dash$acyclic** if $R^{>0}F(Q) = 0$.
- $R^iF$ can be computed using $F\dash$acyclic objects instead of injective resolutions.

:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
Fix a right \(R\dash\)module \( M \in \modr \), then $F \da \Hom_{\modr}(M, \wait): \modr \to \Ab$ is a left-exact functor.
Its right-derived functors are **ext functors** and denoted $\Ext_{\modr}^i(M, \wait)$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
\( \Ext_{\modr}^i(M, A) = (R^i F)(A) = [ R^i \Hom_{\modr}(M, \wait) ] (A) \).
:::

:::{.remark}
Exercises 2.5.1, 2.5.2 are important extensions of our existing characterizations of injectives and projectives in $\modr$.
These upgrade the characterization involving $\Hom$ to one involving $\Ext$.
Note the typo in 2.5.1.3, it should say the following:

"$B$ is $\Hom_{R}(A, \wait)$ is acyclic for all $A$."
:::

:::{.remark}
Fix $B\in \modr$ and consider $G\da \Hom_{\modr}(\wait, B): \modr \to \Ab$.
Then $G$ is still left-exact, but is now *contravariant*.
We can regard it as a covariant functor left-exact functor $G: \modr ^\op \to \Ab$.
So we define $R^i G(A)$ by an injective resolution of $A$ in \( \cat{A}^\op \), and this is the same as a projective resolution of $A$ in \( \cat{A} \).
So apply \( G \) and take cohomology.
It turns out that \( R^i \Hom_{\modr}(\wait, B) \cong R^i \Hom_{\modr}(A, \wait)(B) \da \Ext^i_{\rmod}(A, B) \), so we can use the same notation $\Ext^i_R(\wait, B)$ for both cases.
:::

## 2.6: Adjoint Functors and Left/Right Exactness


:::{.slogan}
$\wait$ adjoints are $\wait^\op$ exact, since $\wait$ adjoints have $\wait\dash$derived functors.
:::


:::{.theorem title="?"}
Let 
\[
L: A &\to B \\
R: B &\to A 
.\]
be an adjoint pair of functors.
Then there exists a natural isomorphism
\[
\tau_{AB}: \Hom_{\cat{B}}(LA, B) \mapsvia{\sim} \Hom_{\cat{A}}(A, RB) && \forall A\in \cat{A}, B\in \cat{B}
,\]
and $L$ is right exact, $B$ is left exact.
:::


:::{.proposition title="1.6: Yoneda"}
A sequence
\[
A \mapsvia{\alpha} B \mapsvia{\beta} C
\]
is exact in \( \cat{A} \) if and only if for all \( M \in \Ob( \cat{A} ) \), the sequence
\[
\Hom_{\cat{A})(M, A)
\mapsvia{\alpha^* \da \alpha\circ \wait} 
\Hom_{\cat{A})(M, B)
\mapsvia{\beta^* \da \beta \circ \wait} 
\Hom_{\cat{A})(M, C)
\]
is exact.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
\envlist

1. Take $M=A$, then $0 = \beta^* \alpha^*(\one_A) = \beta \alpha \one = \beta \alpha$.
  Thus $\im \alpha \subseteq \ker \beta$.

2. Take $M = \ker \beta$ and consider the inclusion \( \iota: \ker M \injects B \), then \( \beta^*(\iota) = \beta \iota = 0 \) and thus \( \iota \in \ker \beta^* = \im \alpha^* \).
  So there exists \( \sigma\in \Hom( \ker \beta, A) \) such that \( \iota = \alpha^* (\sigma) \da \alpha \sigma \), and thus \( \ker \beta = \im \ioa \subset \im \alpha \).

Thus $\ker \beta= \im \alpha$, yielding exactness of the bottom sequence.

:::










