# Wednesday, January 27

See phone pic for missed first 10m.

## 1.4: Chain Homotopies


:::{.definition title="Split Exact"}
?
:::

Note that when $C$ is split exact, we have

% https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMiwwLCJDX24iXSxbNCwwLCJDX3tuLTF9Il0sWzIsMiwiQ19uIl0sWzAsMiwiQ197bisxfSJdLFszLDIsImQiXSxbMCwxLCJkIl0sWzAsMywic19uIiwxXSxbMSwyLCJzX3tuLTF9IiwxXSxbMCwyLCJcXGlkIiwxXV0=
\begin{tikzcd}
	&& {C_n} && {C_{n-1}} \\
	\\
	{C_{n+1}} && {C_n}
	\arrow["d", from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["d", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{s_n}"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{s_{n-1}}"{description}, from=1-5, to=3-3]
	\arrow["\id"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}


:::{.example title="Not all complexes split"}
Take $C = 0 \to \ZZ/2\ZZ \mapsvia{d} \ZZ/4\ZZ \to \ZZ/2\ZZ \to 0$.
Then $\im d = \ts{0, 2} = \ker d$, but this does not split since $\ZZ/2\ZZ^2 \not\cong \ZZ/4\ZZ$: one has an element of order 4 in the underlying additive group.
Equivalently, there is no complement to the image.
What might be familiar from algebra is $ds = \id$, but the more general notion is $dsd = d$.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
The following complex is not split exact for the same reason:
\[
\cdots \mapsvia{\cdot 2} \ZZ/4\ZZ \mapsvia{\cdot 2} \ZZ/4\ZZ \to \cdots
.\]
:::

:::{.question}
Given $f,g: C\to D$, when do we get equality $f_* = g_*: H_*(C) \to H_*(D)$?
:::


:::{.definition title="Homotopy Terminology for Chains"}
A chain map $f:C\to D$ is **nullhomotopic** if and only if there exist maps $s_n: C_n\to D_{n+1}$ such that $f = ds + sd$:

% https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMiwwLCJDX24iXSxbNCwwLCJDX3tuLTF9Il0sWzIsMiwiRF9uIl0sWzAsMiwiRF97bisxfSJdLFszLDIsImQiXSxbMCwxLCJkIl0sWzAsMywic19uIiwxXSxbMSwyLCJzX3tuLTF9IiwxXSxbMCwyLCJcXGlkIiwxXV0=
\begin{tikzcd}
	&& {C_n} && {C_{n-1}} \\
	\\
	{D_{n+1}} && {D_n}
	\arrow["d", from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["d", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{s_n}"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{s_{n-1}}"{description}, from=1-5, to=3-3]
	\arrow["\id"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

The map $s$ is called a **chain contraction**.
Two maps are **chain homotopic** (or initially: $f$ is chain homotopic to $g$, since we don't yet know if this relation is symmetric) if and only if $f-g$ is nullhomotopic, i.e. $f-g = ds + sd$.
The map $s$ is called a **chain homotopy** from $f$ to $g$.
A map $f$ is a **chain homotopy equivalence** if both $fg$ and $gf$ are chain homotopic to the identities on $C$ and $D$ respectively.
:::


:::{.lemma title="?"}
If map $f:C\to D$ is nullhomotopic then $f_*: H_*(C) \to H_*(D)$ is the zero map.
Thus if $f,g$ are chain homotopic, then they induce equal maps.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
An element in the quotient $H_n(C)$ is represented by an $n\dash$cycle $x\in Z_n(C)$.
By a previous exercise, $f(x)$ is a well-defined element of $H_n(D)$, and using that $d(x) = 0$ we have
\[
f(x) = (ds + sd)(x) = d(s(x))
,\]
and so $f[x] = [f(x)] = [0]$.

% https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNyxbMiwxLCJDX24iXSxbNCwxLCJDX3tuLTF9Il0sWzIsMywiRF9uIl0sWzAsMywiRF97bisxfSJdLFsyLDAsIngiXSxbNCwwLCJkKHgpID0gMCJdLFsyLDQsImQocyh4KSkiXSxbMywyLCJkIl0sWzAsMSwiZCJdLFswLDMsInNfbiIsMV0sWzEsMiwic197bi0xfSIsMV0sWzAsMiwiXFxpZCIsMV1d
\begin{tikzcd}
	&& x && {d(x) = 0} \\
	&& {C_n} && {C_{n-1}} \\
	\\
	{D_{n+1}} && {D_n} \\
	&& {d(s(x))}
	\arrow["d", from=4-1, to=4-3]
	\arrow["d", from=2-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow["{s_n}"{description}, from=2-3, to=4-1]
	\arrow["{s_{n-1}}"{description}, from=2-5, to=4-3]
	\arrow["\id"{description}, from=2-3, to=4-3]
\end{tikzcd}

Now applying the first part to $f-g$ to get the second part.
:::


> See Weibel for topological motivations.

## 1.5 Mapping Cones

Note that we'll skip *mapping cylinders*, since they don't come up until the section on triangulated categories.
The goal is to see how any two maps between homologies can be fit into a LES.
This helps reduce questions about *quasi-isomorphisms* to questions about split exact complexes.


:::{.definition title="Mapping Cones"}
Suppose we have a chain map $f:B\to C$, then there is a chain complex $\cone(f)$, the **mapping cone of $f$**, defined by
\[
\cone(f)_n = B_{n-1} \oplus C_n
.\]

:::





