# Wednesday, January 13

Reference:

- The course text is Charles A. Weibel, An introduction to homological algebra, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 38, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
 - See corrections: Many corrections to Weibel's book: <http://www.math.rutgers.edu/~weibel/Hbook-corrections.html>
- 1.1-1.5, 2.2-2.7, 3.4 3.6, 6.1, 5.1-5.2, 5.4-5.8, 6.8, 6.7, 6.3, 7.1-7.5, 7.7-7.8, along with most of Appendix A when needed.

## Overview



:::{.definition title="Exact complexes"}
A complex is given by
\[
\cdots \mapsvia{d_{i-1}} M_{i-1} \mapsvia{d_i} M_i M_{i+1} \mapsvia{d_{i+1}} \cdots
.\]
where $M_i \in \rmod$ and $d_i \circ d_{i-1} = 0$, which happens if and only if $\im d_{i-1} \subseteq \ker d_i$.
If $\im d_{i-1} = \ker d_i$, this complex is **exact**.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
We can apply a functor such as $\tensor_R N$ to get a new complex 
\[
\cdots \mapsvia{d_{i-1} \tensor 1_N} M_{i-1} \tensor_R N \mapsvia{d_i \tensor 1} M_i \tensor N  \to M_{i+1} \mapsvia{d_{i+1} \tensor 1} \cdots
.\]

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Applying $\Hom(N, \wait)$ similarly yields $\Hom_R(N, M_{i}) \mapsvia{d_{i-1}^*} \Hom_R(N, M_{i+1})$, where $d_i^* = d_i \circ (\wait)$ is given by composition.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Applying $\Hom(\wait, N)$ yields $\Hom_R(M_i, N) \mapsvia{d_{i}^*} \Hom_R(M_{i+1}, N)$ where $d_i^* = (\wait) \circ d_i$.
:::


:::{.remark}
Note that we can also take complexes with arrows in the other direction.
For $F$ a functor, we can rewrite these examples as $d_i^* \circ d_{i-1}^* = F(d_i) \circ F(d_{i-1}) = F(d_i \circ d_{i-1}) = F(0) = 0$, provided $F$ is nice enough and sends zero to zero.
This follows from the fact that functors preserve composition.
:::

Even if the original complex is exact, the new one may not be, so we can define the following:

:::{.definition title="Cohomology"}
\[
H^i(M^*) = \ker d_i^* / \im d_{i-1}^*
.\]
:::

These will lead to **$i$th derived functors**, and category theory will be useful here.
See appendix in Weibel.
For a category \( \mathcal{C}  \) we'll define 

- \( \mathrm{Obj}(\mathcal{C} ) \) as the objects 
- \( \Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A, B)  \) a set of morphisms between them, where a more modern notation might be \( \mathrm{Mor}(A, B)  \).
- Morphisms compose: $A \mapsvia{f} B \mapsvia{g} C$ means that \( g\circ f \in \Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A, C)  \) 
- Associativity
- Identity morphisms

See the appendix for diagrams defining zero objects and the zero map, which we'll need to make sense of exactness.
We'll also needs notions of kernels and images, or potentially cokernels instead of images since they're closely related.








