# Wednesday, February 24

## Finishing the Proof of Balancing Tor

We were trying to prove that taking the left derived functors of the two slots in $\Tor$ yield the same thing.

> See the diagram from last time!

:::{.proof title="?"}

We'll need the following:

:::{.claim}
This induces a *quasi-isomorphism*
\[
P\tensor B \fromvia{1\tensor \eta} \Tor(P\tensor Q) \mapsvia{\eps \tensor \one} \Tot(A\tensor Q) = A\tensor Q
,\]
i.e. it is a morphism that induces an isomorphism on homology.
:::

Recall that by Corollary 1.5, a chain complex is a quasi-isomorphism if and only if the cone complex is acyclic/exact.
In degree $n$ of the total complex, the $n$th piece is the $n$th diagonal and we have
\[
(P_n \tensor Q_0)
\oplus \cdots \oplus 
(P_0 \tensor Q_n)
.\]
where $P_0 \mapsvia{\eps \tensor \one A \tensor Q_n}$.
Recall that for a map \( B_n \mapsvia{f} C_n \), the cone complex was given by

\begin{tikzcd}
	{B_{n-1}} & \oplus & {C_n} \\
	\\
	{B_{n-2}} & \oplus & {C_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{d^C}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{-d^B}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{-f}"', from=1-1, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCJCX3tuLTF9Il0sWzAsMiwiQl97bi0yfSJdLFsyLDAsIkNfbiJdLFsyLDIsIkNfe24tMX0iXSxbMSwyLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzEsMCwiXFxvcGx1cyJdLFsyLDMsImReQyJdLFswLDEsIi1kXkIiXSxbMCwzLCItZiIsMl1d)

Writing one term out explicitly, we have

\begin{tikzcd}
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus Q_n} & \oplus && {A \tensor Q_n} \\
	\\
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-2}) \oplus Q_{n-1}} & \oplus && {A\tensor Q_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{-d^{\oplus}}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\one\tensor d}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
	\arrow["{-(\eps \tensor \one)}"', from=1-1, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCIoUF97bi0xfVxcdGVuc29yIFFfMCkgXFxvcGx1cyBcXGNkb3RzIFxcb3BsdXMgKFBfMCBcXHRlbnNvciBRX3tuLTF9KSBcXG9wbHVzIFFfbiJdLFswLDIsIihQX3tuLTF9XFx0ZW5zb3IgUV8wKSBcXG9wbHVzIFxcY2RvdHMgXFxvcGx1cyAoUF8wIFxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMn0pIFxcb3BsdXMgUV97bi0xfSJdLFszLDAsIkEgXFx0ZW5zb3IgUV9uIl0sWzMsMiwiQVxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMX0iXSxbMSwwLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzEsMiwiXFxvcGx1cyJdLFswLDEsIi1kXntcXG9wbHVzfSJdLFsyLDMsIlxcb25lXFx0ZW5zb3IgZCJdLFswLDMsIi0oXFxlcHMgXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUpIiwyXV0=)

Call this complex (2).

\todo[inline]{Fix spacing}

On the other hand, consider the double complex obtained from $P\tensor Q$ by adjoining the shifted complex $(A\tensor Q)[1, 0]$[^mistake_in_sign] in column $i=-1$.
This has the effect of keeping the same complex but relabeling left-most column "in degree 0" into "degree $-1$.
Note that this negatives the leftmost vertical differentials $A\tensor Q_n \to A\tensor Q_{n-1}$.
Now call everything above the dotted line $C$.

[^mistake_in_sign]: 
The book may have the sign incorrect here.

Consider $\Tot(C)[-1]$, which in degree $n$ is $(\Tot(C))_{n-1}$ and since this was an odd shift, negates all of the signs of differential.
So in degree $n$, this explicitly looks like
\[
n:\quad (P_{n-1} \tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus (A\tensor Q_n)\\ \\
n:\quad (P_{n-1} \tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus (A\tensor Q_n)\\ \\
.\]

and we have

\begin{tikzcd}
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots } & {\oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1})} & \oplus & {A \tensor Q_n} \\
	\\
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-2})} && \oplus & {A\tensor Q_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{-d^{\oplus}}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\one\tensor d}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
	\arrow["{-(\eps \tensor \one)}"', from=1-2, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNyxbMCwwLCIoUF97bi0xfVxcdGVuc29yIFFfMCkgXFxvcGx1cyBcXGNkb3RzICJdLFswLDIsIihQX3tuLTF9XFx0ZW5zb3IgUV8wKSBcXG9wbHVzIFxcY2RvdHMgXFxvcGx1cyAoUF8wIFxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMn0pIl0sWzMsMCwiQSBcXHRlbnNvciBRX24iXSxbMywyLCJBXFx0ZW5zb3IgUV97bi0xfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcb3BsdXMgKFBfMCBcXHRlbnNvciBRX3tuLTF9KSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcb3BsdXMiXSxbMiwyLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzAsMSwiLWRee1xcb3BsdXN9Il0sWzIsMywiXFxvbmVcXHRlbnNvciBkIl0sWzQsMywiLShcXGVwcyBcXHRlbnNvciBcXG9uZSkiLDJdXQ==)


Calling this complex (3), we have (3) = (2), so it suffices to show (2) is exact, i.e. $\Tot(C)$ is acyclic.
This follow from the next result we'll prove, the *acyclic assembly lemma*.
Note that if $Q_j$ is projective, then it's an algebra fact that $\wait \tensor_R Q_j$ is exact (not just right exact) since projective implies flat.
This implies that the rows of $C$ are exact, since this is taking a project resolution (which is exact) and tensoring with a flat module.
Using that $C$ is supported on the upper half-plane and has exact rows, by this part (3) of the acyclic assembly lemma, $\Tot^{\oplus}(C)$ will be acyclic.
A similar argument will go through to show that $\one\tensor\eta$ is also a quasi-isomorphism by adjoining $(P\tensor B)$ as the $-1$st row and applying a version of the lemma for right half-plane complexes with exact columns.
:::

## Acyclic Assembly Lemma


:::{.proposition title="Acyclic Assembly Lemma"}
Let $C$ be a double complex in $\modr$, then

- $\Tot^{\prod}(C)$ is acyclic if either

  1. $C$ is upper half-plane with exact columns, or
  2. $C$ is right half-plane with exact rows.

- $\Tot^{\oplus }(C)$ is acyclic if either

  1. $C$ is upper half-plane with exact rows[^upper_half_acyclic_assembly_use], or
  2. $C$ is right half-plane with exact columns.
  

[^upper_half_acyclic_assembly_use]: 
This is the part we used previously.

-

:::


