# Sunday, September 13

## General Notes

- If flipping logic and not using a direct proof (contradiction, contrapositive, etc), then signpost/announce it near the beginning of the proof.
- Say what you're assuming at the start of the proof.
- Put any important equations (i.e. major steps of the proof) on their own lines or in displaymath environments.
- Use some whitespace to separate parts of the proof and increase readability.
- Remember that limits of sequences need not exist, but liminfs/limsups always do 
  
  (just may be $\pm \infty$).

- Try to avoid abbreviating the names of major theorems (example: "AP" can stand for many results, not just the Archimedean property!)
- It's not generally true that $a\leq M \implies \abs{a} \leq M$, e.g. take $a=-1$. 
  This only holds $a\geq 0$.

- A generic set may not contain its inf or sup. 
  Example: $\inf \ts{1\over n} = 0$ and $0\not\in \ts{1\over n}$, or $\sup \ts{1-{1\over n}} = 1$ with $1\not \in \ts{1-{1\over n}}$.

- If there exists some element of a set or sequence with a given property, try to say where it comes from and why the property holds for it.
- Similarly, if a property holds for all elements of a set or sequence, try to say why.


## 1.a

:::{.proof title="$A \implies B$"}
\hfill

- Suppose $\ts{a_n}$ is not bounded above.
- Then any $k\in \NN$ is not an upper bound for $\ts{a_n}$.
- So choose a subsequence $a_{n_k} > k$, then by order-limit laws,
\[  
a_{n_k} > k \implies \liminf_{k\to\infty} a_{n_k} > \liminf_{k\to\infty} k = \infty
.\]
:::

:::{.proof title="$\not A \implies \not B$"}
\hfill

- Suppose $\ts{a_n}$ is bounded by $M$, so $a_n < M < \infty$ for all $n\in \NN$.
- Then if $\ts{a_{n_k}}$ is a subsequence, we have $a_{n_k} \in \ts{a_n}$, so $a_{n_k} < M$ for all $k\in \NN$.
- But then
\[  
a_{n_k} < M \implies \limsup_{k\to\infty} a_{n_k} \leq M 
,\]
  
- Now note that if $\lim_{k\to\infty} a_{n_k}$ exists,
\[  
\lim_{k\to\infty} a_{n_k} < \limsup_{k\to\infty} a_{n_k} \leq M < \infty
,\]
 so every subsequence is bounded and thus can not converge to $\infty$. 
:::


## 3.a

:::{.proof title="Using definition (i)"}
\hfill

- Suppose $x_n \leq M$ for all $n$, we will show that every subsequential limit is also bounded by $M$.
- Let $$S \da \ts{x\in \RR \st x \text{ is a subsequential limit of } \ts{x_n}}$$ be the set of subsequential limits.
  - Note that $\inf S \da \liminf_{n\to\infty} x_n$ by definition (i).
- Let $\ts{x_{n_k}}\in S$ be an arbitrary convergent subsequence (since we are only concerned about subsequences with well-defined limits).
- Then for every $k$ we have $x_{n_k} \in \ts{x_n}$, so
\[  
\abs{x_{n_k}} \leq M
.\]

- By order limit laws,
\[  
\abs{x_{n_k}} \leq M \implies 
\lim_{k\to\infty} \abs{x_{n_k}} \leq M
,\]

- Since the map $x\mapsto \abs{x}$ is continuous, using the sequential definition of continuity we can pass the limit through the absolute value to obtain
\[  
\abs{ \lim_{k\to\infty} x_{n_k}} \leq M
.\]

- Since the subsequence was arbitrary, we find that $M$ is an upper bound for $S$ and so $\sup S \leq M$.
- But
\[  
\inf S \leq \sup S \leq M \implies \inf S \leq M
.\]

:::


:::{.proof title="Using definition (ii)"}
\hfill

- Suppose $\abs{x_n} \leq M$ for every $n$, we will directly show that $\abs{\lim_{n\to\infty}\inf_{k\geq n} x_n} \leq M$.
\

- By order-limit laws, for every fixed $n$ we have
\[  
\abs{x_{n}} \leq M \iff -M \leq x_{n} \leq M \implies -M \leq \inf_{k>n} {x_{k}} \leq M 
,\]
  where we've used the fact that $x_n \geq -M$ for all $n$ implies that $\inf_{k\geq n} x_k \geq -M$.

- Again applying order-limit laws,
\[  
-M \leq \inf_{k\geq n} {x_{k}} \leq M  \implies 
-M \leq 
\lim_{n\to\infty} \inf_{k\geq n} {x_{k}} \leq M 
\iff 
\abs{\lim_{n\to\infty} \inf_{k\geq n} x_{n_k}  } \leq M
.\]


:::


## 3.b

:::{.proof}
\hfill

- Suppose $\beta < \liminf_n x_n$, where by definition (i) we define $\liminf_n x_n = \inf S$ where $S$ is the set of subsequential limits of $\ts{x_n}$.
- Then let $M\da \inf S$, so we have $\beta < M$ by assumption, and recall
\[  
M = \inf S \implies
\begin{cases}
M \leq x & \forall x\in S \\
M< M' \implies &\exists x\in S \text{ such that } M\leq x \leq M'.
\end{cases}
\]
- To the contrapositive, suppose $M \leq \beta$; then $\beta$ is of the form $M'$ above and there thus exists a subsequence $\ts{x_{n_k}}$ such that
\[  
\lim_{k\to \infty} \abs{ x_{n_k} - \beta} = 0 \iff \forall\eps,\,\exists K \text{ such that } k\geq K \implies \abs{x_{n_k} - \beta} < \eps
.\]

- Since $M \leq \beta$ are constants, choose $\eps < \beta - M$ and produce a $K$ such that the above condition holds.
- Then $






:::

